
--- Page 1 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_001_00.jpeg]

Chapter 1
UNDERSTANDING
THE BASICS
This is 'good' to Westerners, 'one' to Italians,
'five' to Japanese and 'up yours' to the Greeks
Everyone knows someone who can walk into a room full of
people and, within minutes, give an accurate description about
the relationships between those people and what they are
feeling. The ability to read a person's attitudes and thoughts
by their behaviour was the original communication system
used by humans before spoken language evolved.
Before radio was invented, most communication was done
in writing through books, letters and newspapers, which
meant that ugly politicians and poor speakers, such as
Abraham Lincoln, could be successful if they persisted long
enough and wrote good print copy. The radio era gave open-
ings to people who had a good command of the spoken word,
like Winston Churchill, who spoke wonderfully but may have
struggled to achieve as much in today's more visual era.

--- Page 2 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Today's politicians understand that politics is about image
and appearance and most high-profile politicians now have
personal body language consultants to help them come across
as being sincere, caring and honest, especially when they're
not.
It seems almost incredible that, over the thousands of years
of our evolution, body language has been actively studied on
any scale only since the 1960s and that most of the public has
become aware of its existence only since our book
 Body Lan-
guage
 was published in 1978. Yet most people believe that
speech is still our main form of communication. Speech has
been part of our communication repertoire only in recent
times in evolutionary terms, and is mainly used to convey facts
and data. Speech probably first developed between 2 million
and 500,000 years ago, during which time our brain tripled its
size. Before then, body language and sounds made in the
throat were the main forms of conveying emotions and feel-
ings, and that is still the case today. But because we focus on
the words people speak, most of us are largely uninformed
about body language, let alone its importance in our lives.
Our spoken language, however, recognises how important
body language is to our communication. Here are just a few of
the phrases we use —
Get it off your chest. Keep a stiff upper lip.
Stay at arm's length. Keep your chin up.
Shoulder a burden. Face up to it.
Put your best foot forward. Kiss my butt
Some of these phrases are hard to swallow, but you've got to
give us a big hand because there are some real eye-openers
here. As a rule of thumb, we can keep them coming hand over
fist until you either buckle at the knees or turn your back on
the whole idea. Hopefully, you'll be sufficiently touched by
these phrases to lean towards the concept.

--- Page 3 ---

Understanding the Basics
In the Beginning...
Silent movie actors like Charlie Chaplin were the pioneers of
body language skills, as this was the only means of communi-
cation available on the screen. Each actor's skill was classed as
good or bad by the extent to which he could use gestures and
body signals to communicate to the audience. When talking
films became popular and less emphasis was placed on the
non-verbal aspects of acting, many silent movie actors faded
into obscurity and only those with good verbal and non-verbal
skills survived.
As far as the academic study of body language goes,
perhaps the most influential pre-twentieth-century work was
Charles Darwin's
 The Expression of the Emotions in Man and
Animals,
 published in 1872, but this work tended to be read
mainly by academics. However, it spawned the modern studies
of facial expressions and body language, and many of
Darwin's ideas and observations have since been validated by
researchers around the world. Since that time, researchers have
noted and recorded almost a million non-verbal cues and
signals. Albert Mehrabian, a pioneer researcher of body lan-
guage in the 1950s, found that the total impact of a message is
about 7% verbal (words only) and 38% vocal (including tone
of voice, inflection and other sounds) and
 55%
 non-verbal.
It's how you looked when you said
it, not what you actually said.
Anthropologist Ray Birdwhistell pioneered the original study of
non-verbal communication — what he called 'kinesics'. Birdwhis-
tell made some similar estimates of the amount of non-verbal
communication that takes place between humans. He estimated
that the average person actually speaks words for a total of
about ten or eleven minutes a day and that the average sentence
takes only about 2.5 seconds. Birdwhistell also estimated we can
make and recognise around 250,000 facial expressions.

--- Page 4 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Like Mehrabian, he found that the verbal component of a
face-to-face conversation is less than 35% and that over
 65%
of communication is done non-verbally. Our analysis of thou-
sands of recorded sales interviews and negotiations during the
1970s and 1980s showed that, in business encounters, body
language accounts for between 60 and 80% of the impact
made around a negotiating table and that people form 60 to
80% of their initial opinion about a new person in less than
four minutes. Studies also show that when negotiating over the
telephone, the person with the stronger argument usually
wins, but this is not so true when negotiating face-to-face,
because overall we make our final decisions more on what we
see than what we hear.
Why It's Not What You Say
Despite what it may be politically correct to believe, when we
meet people for the first time we quickly make judgements
about their friendliness, dominance and potential as a sexual
partner - and their eyes are
 not
 the first place we look.
Most researchers now agree that words are used primarily
for conveying information, while body language is used for
negotiating interpersonal attitudes and in some cases is used
as a substitute for verbal messages. For example, a woman can
give a man a 'look to kill' and will convey a very clear message
to him without opening her mouth.
Regardless of culture, words and movements occur together
with such predictability that Birdwhistell was the first to claim
that a well-trained person should be able to tell what move-
ment a person is making by listening to their voice.
Birdwhistell even learned how to tell what language a person
was speaking, simply by watching their gestures.
Many people find difficulty in accepting that humans are
still biologically animals. We are a species of primate —
 Homo
sapiens —
 a hairless ape that has learned to walk on two limbs
and has a clever, advanced brain. But like any other species, we

--- Page 5 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_005_00.jpeg]

Understanding the Basics
are still dominated by biological rules that control our actions,
reactions, body language and gestures. The fascinating thing is
that the human animal is rarely aware that its postures, move-
ments and gestures can tell one story while its voice may be
telling another.
How Body Language Reveals Emotions and
Thoughts
Body language is an outward reflection of a person's emo-
tional condition. Each gesture or movement can be a valuable
key to an emotion a person may be feeling at the time. For
example, a man who is self-conscious about gaining weight
may tug at the fold of skin under his chin; the woman who is
aware of extra pounds on her thighs may smooth her dress
down; the person who is feeling fearful or defensive might fold
their arms or cross their legs or both; and a man talking with
a large-breasted woman may consciously avoid staring at her
breasts while, at the same time, unconsciously use groping ges-
tures with his hands.
Prince Charles finds a bosom buddy
11

--- Page 6 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_006_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
The key to reading body language is being able to understand
a person's emotional condition while listening to what they are
saying and noting the circumstances under which they are
saying it. This allows you to separate fact from fiction and
reality from fantasy. In recent times, we humans have had an
obsession with the spoken word and our ability to be conver-
sationalists. Most people, however, are remarkably unaware of
body language signals and their impact, despite the fact that
we now know that most of the messages in any face-to-face
conversation are revealed through body signals. For example,
France's President Chirac, USA's President Ronald Reagan and
Australia's Prime Minister Bob Hawke all used their hands to
reveal the relative sizes of issues in their mind. Bob Hawke
once defended pay increases for politicians by comparing their
salaries to corporate executive salaries. He claimed that exec-
utive salaries had risen by a huge amount and that proposed
politicians' increases were relatively smaller. Each time he
mentioned politicians' incomes, he held his hands a yard (1m)
apart. When he mentioned executive salaries, however, he held
them only a foot (30cm) apart. His hand distances revealed
that he felt politicians were getting a much better deal than he
was prepared to admit.
President Jacques Chirac — measuring the size
of an issue or simply boasting about his love life?
12

--- Page 7 ---

Understanding the Basics
Why Women are More Perceptive
we say someone is 'perceptive' or 'intuitive' about
people, we are unknowingly referring to their ability to read
another person's body language and to compare these cues
with verbal signals. In other words, when we say that we have
a 'hunch' or 'gut feeling' that someone has told us a lie, we
usually mean that their body language and their spoken words
don't agree. This is also what speakers call audience aware-
ness, or relating to a group. For example, if an audience were
sitting back in their seats with their chins down and arms
crossed on their chest, a 'perceptive' speaker would get a
hunch or feeling that his delivery was not going across well. He
would realise that he needed to take a different approach to
gain audience involvement. Likewise, a speaker who was not
'perceptive' would blunder on regardless.
Being 'perceptive' means being able to spot the contradictions
between someone's words and their body language.
Overall, women are far more perceptive than men, and this has
given rise to what is commonly referred to as 'women's intu-
ition'. Women have an innate ability to pick up and decipher
non-verbal signals, as well as having an accurate eye for small
details. This is why few husbands can lie to their wives and get
away with it and why, conversely, most women can pull the
wool over a man's eyes without his realising it.
Research by psychologists at Harvard University showed
how women are far more alert to body language than men.
They showed short films, with the sound turned off, of a man
and woman communicating, and the participants were asked
to decode what was happening by reading the couple's expres-
sions. The research showed that women read the situation
accurately 87% of the time while the men scored only 42%
accuracy. Men in 'nurturing' occupations, such as artistic
types, acting and nursing, did nearly as well as the women; gay

--- Page 8 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
men also scored well. Female intuition is particularly evident
in women who have raised children. For the first few years, the
mother relies almost solely on the non-verbal channel to com-
municate with the child and this is why women are often more
perceptive negotiators than men because they practise reading
signals early.
What Brain Scans Show
Most women have the brain organisation to out-communicate
any man on the planet. Magnetic Resonance Imaging brain
scans (MRI) clearly show why women have far greater capac-
ity for communicating with and evaluating people than men
do. Women have between fourteen and sixteen areas of the
brain to evaluate others' behaviour versus a man's four to six
areas. This explains how a woman can attend a dinner party
and rapidly work out the state of the relationships of other
couples at the party - who's had an argument, who likes who
and so on. It also explains why, from a woman's standpoint,
men don't seem to talk much and, from a man's standpoint,
women never seem to shut up.
As we showed in
 Why Men Don't Listen & Women Can't
Read Maps
 (Orion), the female brain is organised for multi-
tracking — the average woman can juggle between two and four
unrelated topics at the same time. She can watch a television
programme while talking on the telephone plus listen to a
second conversation behind her, while drinking a cup of
coffee. She can talk about several unrelated topics in the one
conversation and uses five vocal tones to change the subject or
emphasise points. Unfortunately, most men can only identify
three of these tones. As a result, men often lose the plot when
women are trying to communicate with them.
Studies show that a person who relies on hard visual evi-
dence face to face about the behaviour of another person is
more likely to make more accurate judgements about that
person than someone who relies solely on their gut feeling.
14

--- Page 9 ---

Understanding the Basics
The evidence is in the person's body language and, while
women can do it subconsciously, anyone can teach themselves
consciously to read the signals. That's what this book is about.
How Fortune-Tellers Know So Much
If you've ever visited a fortune teller you probably came away
amazed at the things they knew about you — things no one else
could possibly have known — so it must be ESP, right? Research
into the fortune-telling business shows that operators use a
technique known as 'cold reading' which can produce an accu-
racy of around 80% when 'reading' a person you've never met.
While it can appear to be magical to naïve and vulnerable
people, it is simply a process based on the careful observation
of body language signals plus an understanding of human
nature and a knowledge of probability statistics. It's a tech-
nique practised by psychics, tarot card readers, astrologists
and palm readers to gather information about a 'client'. Many
'cold readers' are largely unaware of their abilities to read non-
verbal signals and so also become convinced that they really
must have 'psychic' abilities. This all adds to a convincing per-
formance, bolstered by the fact that people who regularly visit
'psychics' go with positive expectations of the outcome.
Throw in a set of tarot cards, a crystal ball or two and a bit of
theatre, and the stage is perfectly set for a body-language-
reading session that can convince even the most hardened
sceptic that strange, magical forces must be at work. It all boils
down to the reader's ability to decode a person's reactions to
statements made and to questions asked, and by information
gathered from simple observation about a person's appear-
ance. Most 'psychics' are female because, as women, as
discussed previously, they have the extra brain wiring to allow
them to read the body signals of babies and to read others'
emotional condition.

--- Page 10 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
The fortune-teller gazed into her crystal ball and then
started laughing uncontrollably. So John punched her on the
nose. It was the first time he'd ever struck a happy medium.
To demonstrate the point, here now is a psychic reading for
you personally. Imagine you've come to a dimly lit, smoke-
filled room where a jewel-encrusted psychic wearing a turban
is seated at a low, moon-shaped table with a crystal ball:
I'm glad you've come to this session and I can see you have
things that are troubling you because I am receiving strong
signals from you. I sense that the things you really want out
of life sometimes seem unrealistic and you often wonder
whether you can achieve them. I also sense that at times you
are friendly, social and outgoing to others, but that at other
times you are withdrawn, reserved and cautious. You take
pride in being an independent thinker but also know not to
accept what you see and hear from others, without proof. You
like change and variety but become restless if controlled by
restrictions and routine. You want to share your innermost
feelings with those closest to you but have found it unwise to
be too open and revealing. A man in your life with the initial
'S' is exerting a strong influence over you right now and a
woman who is born in November will contact you in the next
month with an exciting offer. While you appear disciplined
and controlled on the outside, you tend to be concerned and
worried on the inside and at times you wonder whether or not
you have made the right choice or decision.
So how did we go? Did we read you accurately? Studies show
that the information in this 'reading' is more than 80% accu-
rate for any person reading it. Throw in an excellent ability to
read body language postures, facial expressions and a person's
other twitches and movements, plus dim lighting, weird music
and a stick of incense, and we guarantee you can even amaze

--- Page 11 ---

Understanding the Basics
the dog! We won't encourage you to become a fortune-teller
but you'll soon be able to read others as accurately as they do.
Inborn, Genetic or Learned Culturally?
When you cross your arms on your chest, do you cross left over
right or right over left? Most people cannot confidently
describe which way they do this until they try it. Cross your
arms on your chest right now and then try to quickly reverse
the position. Where one way feels comfortable, the other feels
completely wrong. Evidence suggests that this may well be a
genetic gesture that cannot be changed.
Seven out of ten people cross
their left arm over their right.
Much debate and research has been done to discover whether
non-verbal signals are inborn, learned, genetically transferred
or acquired in some other way. Evidence has been collected
from observation of blind people (who could not have learned
non-verbal signals through a visual channel), from observing
the gestural behaviour of many different cultures around the
world and from studying the behaviour of our nearest anthro-
pological relatives, the apes and monkeys.
The conclusions of this research indicate that some gestures
fall into each category. For example, most primate babies are
born with the immediate ability to suck, showing that this is
either inborn or genetic. The German scientist Eibl-Eibesfeldt
round that the smiling expressions of children born deaf and
blind occur independently of learning or copying, which
means that these must also be inborn gestures. Ekman, Friesen
and Sorenson supported some of Darwin's original beliefs
about inborn gestures when they studied the facial expressions
of people from five widely different cultures. They found that
each culture used the same basic facial gestures to show

--- Page 12 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
emotion, which led them to the conclusion that these gestures
must also be inborn.
Cultural differences are many but the basic
body language signals are the same everywhere.
Debate still exists as to whether some gestures are culturally
learned, and become habitual, or are genetic. For example,
most men put on a coat right arm first; most women put it on
left arm first. This shows that men use their left brain hemi-
sphere for this action while women use the right hemisphere.
When a man passes a woman in a crowded street, he usually
turns his body towards her as he passes; she instinctively turns
her body away from him to protect her breasts. Is this an
inborn female reaction or has she learned to do this by uncon-
sciously watching other females?
Some Basic Origins
Most of the basic communication signals are the same all over
the world. When people are happy they smile; when they are
sad or angry they frown or scowl. Nodding the head is almost
universally used to indicate 'yes' or affirmation. It appears to
be a form of head lowering and is probably an inborn gesture
because it's also used by people born blind. Shaking the head
from side to side to indicate 'no' or negation is also universal
and appears to be a gesture learned in infancy. When a baby
has had enough milk, it turns its head from side to side to
reject its mother's breast. When the young child has had
enough to eat, he shakes his head from side to side to stop any
attempt to spoon-feed him and, in this way, he quickly learns
to use the head shaking gesture to show disagreement or a neg-
ative attitude.
18

--- Page 13 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_013_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_013_01.jpeg]

Understanding the Basics
The head-shaking gesture signals 'no'
and owes its origin to breastfeeding.
The evolutionary origin of some gestures can be traced to our
primitive animal past. Smiling, for example, is a threat gesture
for most carnivorous animals, but for primates it is done in
conjunction with non-threatening gestures to show submis-
sion.
Baring the teeth and nostril flaring are derived from the act
of attacking and are primitive signals used by other primates.
Sneering is used by animals to warn others that, if necessary,
they'll use their teeth to attack or defend. For humans, this
gesture still appears even though humans won't usually attack
with their teeth.
Human and animal sneering — you wouldn't want to go
on a date with either of these two
Nostril flaring allows more air to oxygenate the body in prepa-
ration for fight or flight and, in the primate world, it tells
others that back-up support is needed to deal with an immi-
nent threat. In the human world, sneering is caused by anger,
irritation, when a person feels under physical or emotional
threat or feels that something is not right.
19

--- Page 14 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_014_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Universal Gestures
The
 Shoulder Shrug
 is also a good example of a universal
gesture that is used to show that a person doesn't know or
doesn't understand what you are saying. It's a multiple gesture
that has three main parts: exposed palms to show nothing is
being concealed in the hands, hunched shoulders to protect the
throat from attack and raised brow which is a universal, sub-
missive greeting.
The Shoulder Shrug shows submission
Just as verbal language differs from culture to culture, so some
body language signals can also differ. Whereas one gesture
may be common in a particular culture and have a clear inter-
pretation, it may be meaningless in another culture or even
have a completely different meaning. Cultural differences will
be covered later, in Chapter 5.
Three Rules for Accurate Reading
What you see and hear in any situation does not necessarily
reflect the real attitudes people may actually have. You need to
follow three basic rules to get things right.
20

--- Page 15 ---

Understanding the Basics
Rule 1. Read Gestures in Clusters
One of the most serious errors a novice in body language can
make is to interpret a solitary gesture in isolation of other ges-
tures or circumstances. For example, scratching the head can
mean a number of things - sweating, uncertainty, dandruff,
fleas, forgetfulness or lying - depending on the other gestures
that occur at the same time. Like any spoken language, body
language has words, sentences and punctuation. Each gesture
is like a single word and one word may have several different
meanings. For example, in English, the word 'dressing' has at
least ten meanings including the act of putting on clothing, a
sauce for food, stuffing for a fowl, an application for a wound,
fertiliser and grooming for a horse.
It's only when you put a word into a sentence with other
words that you can fully understand its meaning. Gestures
come in 'sentences' called clusters and invariably reveal the
truth about a person's feelings or attitudes. A body language
cluster, just like a verbal sentence, needs at least three words in
it before you can accurately define each of the words. The 'per-
ceptive' person is the one who can read the body language
sentences and accurately match them against the person's
verbal sentences.
Scratching the head can mean uncertainty
but it's also a sign of dandruff.
So always look at gesture clusters for a correct reading. Each
of us has one or more repetitive gestures that simply reveal we
are either bored or feeling under pressure. Continual hair
touching or twirling is a common example of this but, in iso-
lation of other gestures, it's likely to mean the person is feeling
uncertain or anxious. People stroke their hair or head because
that's how their mother comforted them when they were chil-
dren.
To demonstrate the point about clusters, here's a common
21

--- Page 16 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_016_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_016_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Critical Evaluation
 gesture cluster someone might use when
they are unimpressed with what they are hearing:
You're losing points with this man
The main Critical Evaluation signal is the hand-to-face
gesture, with the index finger pointing up the cheek while
another finger covers the mouth and the thumb supports the
chin. Further evidence that this listener is having critical
thoughts about what he hears is supported by the legs being
tightly crossed and the arm crossing the body (defensive) while
the head and chin are down (negative/hostile). This body lan-
guage 'sentence' says something like, 'I don't like what you're
saying', 'I disagree' or 'I'm holding back negative feelings'.
Hillary Clinton uses this cluster when she's not convinced
22

--- Page 17 ---

Understanding the Basics
Rule 2. Look for Congruence
Research shows that non-verbal signals carry about five times
as much impact as the verbal channel and that, when the two
are incongruent people - especially women - rely on the non-
verbal message and disregard the verbal content.
If you, as the speaker, were to ask the listener shown above
to give his opinion about something you've said and he replied
that he disagreed with you, his body language signals would be
congruent with his verbal sentences, that is, they would match.
If, however, he said he
 agreed
 with what you said, he would
more likely be lying because his words and gestures would be
incongruent.
When
 a person's words and body language
are in conflict, women ignore what is said.
If you saw a politician standing behind a lectern speaking con-
fidently but with his arms tightly folded across his chest
(defensive) and chin down (critical/hostile), while telling his
audience how receptive and open he is to the ideas of young
people, would you be convinced? What if he attempted to con-
vince you of his warm, caring approach while giving short,
sharp karate chops to the lectern? Sigmund Freud once
reported that while a patient was verbally expressing happi-
ness with her marriage, she was unconsciously slipping her
wedding ring on and off her finger. Freud was aware of the sig-
nificance of this unconscious gesture and was not surprised
when marriage problems began to surface.
Observation of gesture clusters and congruence of the
verbal and body language channels are the keys to accurately
interpreting attitudes through body language.
Rule 3. Read Gestures in Context
All gestures should be considered in the context in which they
occur. If, for example, someone was sitting at a bus terminal
23

--- Page 18 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_018_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
with his arms and legs tightly crossed and chin down and it
was a cold winter's day, it would most likely mean that he was
cold, not defensive. If, however, the person used the same ges-
tures while you were sitting across a table from him trying to
sell him an idea, product or service, it could be correctly inter-
preted as meaning that the person was feeling negative or
rejecting your offer.
Cold, not defensive
Throughout this book all body language gestures will be con-
sidered in context and, where possible, gesture clusters will be
examined.
Why It Can be Easy to Misread
Someone who has a soft or limp handshake — especially a man
— is likely to be accused of having a weak character and the next
chapter on handshake techniques will explore the reason behind
this. But if someone has arthritis in their hands it is likely that
24

--- Page 19 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_019_00.jpeg]

Understanding the Basics
they will also use a soft handshake to avoid the pain of a strong
one. Similarly, artists, musicians, surgeons and those whose
occupation is delicate and involves use of their hands generally
prefer not to shake hands, but, if they are forced into it, they
may use a 'dead fish' handshake to protect their hands.
Someone who wears ill-fitting or tight clothing may be unable
to use certain gestures, and this can affect their use of body lan-
guage. For example, obese people can't cross their legs. Women
who wear short skirts will sit with their legs tightly crossed for
protection, but this results in them looking less approachable
and less likely to be asked to dance at a nightclub. These cir-
cumstances apply to the minority of people, but it is important
to consider what effect a person's physical restrictions or dis-
abilities may have on their body movement.
Why Kids are Easier to Read
Older people are harder to read than younger ones because
they have less muscle tone in the face.
The speed of some gestures and how obvious they look to
others is also related to the age of the individual. For example,
if a five-year-old child tells a lie, he's likely to immediately
cover his mouth with one or both hands.
The child telling a lie
The act of covering the mouth can alert a parent to the lie and
this mouth-covering gesture will likely continue throughout
25

--- Page 20 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_020_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_020_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
the person's lifetime, usually only varying in the speed at
which it's done. When a teenager tells a lie, the hand is brought
to the mouth in a similar way to the five-year-old, but instead
of the obvious hand-slapping gesture over the mouth, the
fingers rub lightly around it.
The teenager telling a lie
The original mouth-covering gesture becomes even faster in
adulthood. When an adult tells a lie, it's as if his brain
instructs his hand to cover his mouth in an attempt to block
the deceitful words, just as it did for the five-year-old and the
teenager. But, at the last moment, the hand is pulled away
from the face and a nose touch gesture results. This is simply
an adult's version of the mouth-covering gesture that was used
in childhood.
Bill Clinton answering questions about
Monica Lewinsky in front of the Grand Jury
26

--- Page 21 ---

Understanding the Basics
This shows how, as people get older, their gestures become
more subtle and less obvious and is why it's often more diffi-
cult to read the gestures of a fifty-year-old than those of a
five-year-old.
Can You Fake it?
We are regularly asked, 'Can you fake body language?' The
general answer to this question is 'no', because of the lack of
congruence that is likely to occur between the main gestures,
the body's micro-signals and the spoken words. For example,
open palms are associated with honesty but when the faker
holds his palms out and smiles at you as he tells a lie, his
micro-gestures give him away. His pupils may contract, one
eyebrow may lift or the corner of his mouth may twitch, and
these signals contradict the open palm gesture and the sincere
smile. The result is that the receivers, especially women, tend
not to believe what they hear.
Body language is easier to fake with men
than with women because, overall, men
aren't good readers of body language.
True-Life Story:The Lying Job Applicant
we were interviewing a man who was explaining why he had
quit his last job. He told us that there had been insufficient
future opportunity available to him and that it was a hard
decision to leave as he got on well with all the staff there. A
female interviewer said she had an 'intuitive feeling' that the
applicant was lying and that he had negative feelings about his
forrner boss, despite the applicant's continual praising of his
boss. During a review of the interview on slow-motion video,
we noticed that each time the applicant mentioned his former
27

--- Page 22 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
boss a split-second sneer appeared on the left side of his face.
Often these contradictory signals will flash across a person's
face in a fraction of a second and are missed by an untrained
observer. We telephoned his former boss and discovered the
applicant had been fired for dealing drugs to other staff
members. As confidently as this applicant had tried to fake his
body language, his contradictory micro-gestures gave the
game away to our female interviewer.
The key here is being able to separate the real gestures from
fake ones so a genuine person can be distinguished from a liar
or impostor. Signals like pupil dilation, sweating and blushing
cannot be consciously faked but exposing the palms to try to
appear honest is easily learned.
Fakers can only pretend for a short period of time.
There are, however, some cases in which body language is
deliberately faked to gain certain advantages. Take, for
example, the Miss World or Miss Universe contest, in which
each contestant uses studiously learned body movements to
give the impression of warmth and sincerity. To the extent
that each contestant can convey these signals, she will score
points from the judges. But even the expert contestants can
only fake body language for a short period of time and even-
tually the body will show contradictory signals that are
independent of conscious actions. Many politicians are
experts in faking body language in order to get the voters to
believe what they are saying, and politicians who can success-
fully do this - such as John F Kennedy and Adolf Hitler — are
said to have 'charisma'.
In summary, it is difficult to fake body language for a long
period of time but, as we will discuss, it's important to learn
how to use positive body language to communicate with
others and to eliminate negative body language that may give
out the wrong message. This can make it more comfortable to
28

--- Page 23 ---

Understanding the Basics
be with others and make you more acceptable to them, which
is one of the aims of this book.
How to Become a Great Reader
Set aside at least fifteen minutes a day to study the body lan-
guage of other people, as well as acquiring a conscious
awareness of your own gestures. A good reading ground is
anywhere that people meet and interact. An airport is a par-
ticularly good place for observing the entire spectrum of
human gestures as people openly express eagerness, anger,
sorrow, happiness, impatience and many other emotions
through body language. Social functions, business meetings
and parties are also excellent. When you become proficient at
the art of reading body language, you can go to a party, sit in
a corner all evening and have an exciting time just watching
other people's body language rituals.
Modern humans are worse at reading
body signals than their ancestors because we
are now distracted by words.
Television also offers an excellent way of learning. Turn down
the sound and try to understand what is happening by first
watching the picture. By turning the sound up every few
minutes, you will be able to check how accurate your non-
verbal readings are and, before long, it will be possible to
watch an entire programme without any sound and under-
stand what is happening, just as deaf people do.
Learning to read body language signals not only makes you
more acutely aware of how others try to dominate and manip-
ulate, it brings the realisation that others are also doing the
same to us and, most importantly, it teaches us to be more sen-
sitive to other people's feelings and emotions.
we have now witnessed the emergence of a new kind of
29

--- Page 24 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
social scientist - the Body Language Watcher. Just as the bird-
watcher loves watching birds and their behaviour, so the Body
Language Watcher delights in watching the non-verbal cues
and signals of human beings. He watches them at social func-
tions, at beaches, on television, at the office or anywhere that
people interact. He's a student of behaviour who wants to
learn about the actions of his fellow humans so that he may
ultimately learn more about himself and how he can improve
his relationships with others.
What's the difference between an observer and a stalker?
A clipboard and pen.
30

--- Page 25 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_025_00.jpeg]

Chapter 2
THE POWER IS IN
YOUR HANDS
How the Palms and Handshakes
are used to control
In ancient times, open palms were used to show
that no weapons were being concealed
It was Adam's first day on the job with his new PR company
and he wanted to make a good impression on everyone. As he
was introduced to colleague after colleague, he shook their
hands enthusiastically and gave everyone a broad smile.
Adam stood 6 foot 3 inches (1.9m) tall and was good looking,
well dressed and certainly looked like a successful PR man.
He always gave a firm handshake, just the way his father had
taught him when he was young. So firm in fact, that it drew
blood on the ring fingers of two female colleagues and left
several others feeling injured. Other men competed with
Adam's handshake — that's what men do. The women,
31

--- Page 26 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
however, suffered in silence and soon were whispering, 'Stay
away from that new guy Adam — he's a bruiser!' The men
never brought it up - but the women simply avoided Adam.
And half the firm's bosses were women.
Here's a handy thought — whether you are heavy-handed or
high-handed, engage in sleight-of-hand to avoid a hand-to-
mouth existence, you might have to show your hand
sometimes to gain the upper hand. Don't get caught red-
handed, or try to wash your hands of a mistake, because if you
bite the hand that feeds you, things could get out of hand.
The hands have been the most important tools in human
evolution and there are more connections between the brain
and the hands than between any other body parts. Few people
ever consider how their hands behave or the way they shake
hands when they meet someone. Yet those first five to seven
pumps establish whether dominance, submission or power
plays will take place. Throughout history, the open palm has
been associated with truth, honesty, allegiance and submis-
sion. Many oaths are still taken with the palm of the hand over
the heart, and the palm is held in the air when somebody is
giving evidence in a court of law; the Bible is held in the left
hand and the right palm held up for the members of the court
to view. One of the most valuable clues to discovering whether
someone is being open and honest - or not - is to watch for
palm displays. Just as a dog will expose its throat to show
submission or surrender to the victor, humans use their palms
to display in a similar way to show that they are unarmed and
therefore not a threat.
Submissive dogs reveal their throats.
Humans show their palms.
32

--- Page 27 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_027_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_027_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_027_02.jpeg]

The Power Is in Your Hands
How to Detect Openness
When people want to be open or honest, they will often hold
one or both palms out to the other person and say something
like, 'I didn't do it!', 'I'm sorry if I upset you' or 'I'm telling
you the truth'. When someone begins to open up or be truth-
ful, they will likely expose all or part of their palms to the
other person. Like most body language signals, this is a com-
pletely unconscious gesture, one that gives you an 'intuitive'
feeling or hunch that the other person is telling the truth.
'Trust me - I'm a doctor'
The palms are intentionally used everywhere
to infer an open, honest approach
33

--- Page 28 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_028_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
When children are lying or concealing something, they'll often
hide their palms behind the back. Similarly, a man who wants to
conceal his whereabouts after a night out with the boys might
hide his palms in his pockets, or in an arms-crossed position,
when he tries to explain to his partner where he was. However,
the hidden palms may give her an intuitive feeling that he is not
telling the truth. A woman who is trying to hide something will
try to avoid the subject or talk about a range of unrelated topics
while doing various other activities at the same time.
When men lie their body language can be obvious.
Women prefer to look busy as they lie.
Salespeople are taught to watch for a customer's exposed
palms when he gives reasons or objections about why he can't
buy a product, because when someone
is giving valid reasons, they usually
show their palms. When people are
being open in explaining their reasons
they use their hands and flash their
palms whereas someone who isn't
telling the truth is likely to give the
same verbal responses but conceal their
hands.
Keeping their hands in their pockets
is a favourite ploy of men who don't
want to participate in a conversation.
The palms were originally like the vocal
cords of body language because they
did more 'talking' than any other body
part and putting them away was like
keeping one's mouth shut.
Palms-in-Pockets: Prince William showing
the media that he doesn't want to talk
34

--- Page 29 ---

The Power Is in Your Hands
Intentional Use of the Palms to Deceive
Some people ask, 'If I tell a lie and keep my palms visible, will
people be more likely to believe me?' The answer is yes - and no.
If you tell an outright lie with your palms exposed, you might
still appear insincere to your listeners because many of the other
gestures that should also be visible when displaying honesty are
absent and the negative gestures used during lying will appear
and will be incongruent with the open palms. Con artists and
professional liars are people who have developed the special art
of making their non-verbal signals complement their verbal lies.
The more effectively the professional con artist can use the body
language of honesty when telling a lie, the better he is at his job.
Will you still love me when I'm old and grey?' she asked, palms
visible.'Not only will I love you,' he replied, 'I'll write to you.'
The Law of Cause and Effect
It's possible, however, to appear more open and credible by
practising open palm gestures when communicating with
others. Interestingly, as the open palm gestures become habit-
ual, the tendency to tell untruths diminishes. Most people find
it difficult to lie with their palms exposed because of the law
of cause and effect. If a person is being open they'll expose
their palms, but just having their palms exposed makes it dif-
ficult for the person to tell a convincing lie. This is because
gestures and emotions are directly linked to each other. If you
reel defensive, for example, you're likely to cross your arms
across your chest. But if you simply cross your arms you'll
begin to experience defensive feelings. And if you are talking
with your palms exposed it puts even more pressure on the
other person to be truthful too. In other words, open palms
can help to suppress some of the false information others may
tell and encourage them to be more open with you.
35

--- Page 30 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_030_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_030_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Palm Power
One of the least noticed, but most powerful, body signals is
given by the human palm when giving someone directions or
commands and in handshaking. When used in a certain way,
Palm Power
 invests its user with the power of silent authority.
There are three main palm command gestures: the
 Palm-Up
position, the
 Palm-Down
 position and the
 Palm-Closed-
 i
Finger-Pointed
 position. The differences of the three positions
are shown in this example: let's say that you ask someone to
pick up something and carry it to another location. We'll
assume that you use the same tone of voice, the same words
and facial expressions in each example, and that you change
only the position of your palm.
The palm facing up is used as a submissive, non-threatening
gesture, reminiscent of the pleading gesture of a street beggar
and, from an evolutionary perspective, shows the person holds
no weapons. The person being asked to move the item will not
feel they are being pressured into it and are unlikely to feel
threatened by your request. If you want someone to talk you
can use the Palm-Up as a 'handover' gesture to let them know
you expect them to talk and that you're ready to listen.
The Palm-Up gesture became modified over the centuries
and gestures like the
 Single-Palm-Raised-in-the-Air,
 the
 Palm-
Over-tbe-Heart
 and many other variations developed.
Palm up = non threatening 
Palm down — authority
When the palm is turned to face downwards, you will project
immediate authority. The other person will sense that you've
36

--- Page 31 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_031_00.jpeg]

The Power Is in Your Hands
given them an order to move the item and may begin to feel
antagonistic towards you, depending on your relationship with
him or the position you have with him in a work environment.
Turning your palm from facing
upwards to facing downwards completely
alters how others perceive you.
For example, if the other person was someone of equal status,
he might resist a Palm-Down request and would be more likely
to comply if you'd used the Palm-Up position. If the person is
your subordinate, the Palm-Down gesture is seen as acceptable
because you have the authority to use it.
The Nazi salute had the palm facing directly down and was
the symbol of power and tyranny during the Third Reich. If
Adolf Hitler had used his salute in the Palm-Up position no
one would have taken him seriously - they would have
laughed.
Adolf Hitler using one of history's most notable Palm-Down signals
37

--- Page 32 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_032_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
When couples walk hand-in-hand the dominant partner, often 1
the man, walks slightly in front with his hand in the above
position, palm facing backwards while she has her palm facing
forward. This simple little position immediately reveals to an
observer who wears the loincloths in that family.
The Palm-Closed-Finger-Pointed is a fist where the pointed
finger is used like a symbolic club with which the speaker fig-
uratively beats his listeners into submission. Subconsciously, it
evokes negative feelings in others because it precedes a right
over-arm blow, a primal move most primates use in a physical
attack.
Pointing finger — 'Do it or else!'
The Palm-Closed-Finger-Pointed gesture is one of the most
annoying gestures anyone can use while speaking, particularly
when it beats time to the speaker's words. In some countries
such as Malaysia and the Philippines, finger pointing at a
person is an insult as this gesture is only used to point at
animals. Malaysians will use their thumb to point to people or
to give directions.
Our Audience Experiment
We conducted an experiment with eight lecturers who were
asked to use each of these three hand gestures during a series
of ten-minute talks to a range of audiences and we later
recorded the attitudes of the participants to each lecturer. We
found that the lecturers who mostly used the Palm-Up position
received 84% positive testimonials from their participants,
38

--- Page 33 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_033_00.jpeg]

The Power Is in Your Hands
which dropped to 52% when they delivered exactly the same
presentation to another audience using mainly the Palm-Down
position. The Finger-Pointed position recorded only 28% pos-
itive response and some participants had walked out during
the lecture.
The pointing finger creates negative feelings in most listeners
Finger pointing not only registered the least amount of posi-
tive responses from the listeners; they could also recall less of
what the speaker had said. If you are a habitual finger-pointer,
try practising the palm-up and palm-down positions and
you'll find that you can create a more relaxed atmosphere and
have a more positive effect on others. Alternatively, if you
squeeze your fingers against your thumb to make an 'OK' type
of gesture and talk using this position, you'll come across as
authoritative, but not aggressive. We taught this gesture to
groups of speakers, politicians and business leaders and we
measured the audience reactions. The audiences who listened
to the speakers who used the fingertip-touch gestures
described those speakers as 'thoughtful', 'goal-oriented' and
'focused'.
39

--- Page 34 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_034_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_034_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_034_02.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Squeezing the thumb against the fingertips avoids intimidating the audience
Speakers who used the finger-pointed position were described
as 'aggressive', 'belligerent' and 'rude' and recorded the lowest
amount of information retention by their audience. When the
speaker pointed directly at the audience, the delegates became
preoccupied with making personal judgements about the
speaker rather than listening to his content.
An Analysis of Handshake Styles
Shaking hands is a relic of our ancient past. Whenever primi-
tive tribes met under friendly conditions, they would hold
their arms out with their palms exposed to show that no
weapons were being held or concealed. In Roman times, the
practice of carrying a concealed dagger in the sleeve was
common so for protection the Romans developed the
 Lower-
Arm-Grasp
 as a common greeting.
The Lower Arm Grasp -
checking for concealed
weapons — the original
Roman method of
greeting
40

--- Page 35 ---

The Power Is in Your Hands
The modern form of this ancient greeting ritual is the inter-
locking and shaking of the palms and was originally used in
the nineteenth century to seal commercial transactions
between men of equal status. It has become widespread only
in the last hundred years or so and has always remained in the
male domain until recent times. In most Western and Euro-
pean countries today it is performed both on initial greeting
and on departure in all business contexts, and increasingly at
parties and social events by both women and men.
The
 handshake evolved as a way men could
cement a commercial deal with each other.
Even in places such as Japan, where bowing is the traditional
greeting, and Thailand, where they greet using the
 Wai
 — a
gesture that looks similar to praying — the modern handshake
is now widely seen. In most places, the hands are normally
pumped five to seven times but in some countries, for example
Germany, they pump two or three times with an additional
hold time equal to an extra two pumps. The French are the
biggest glad-handers, shaking on both greeting and departure
and spending a considerable time each day shaking hands.
Who Should Reach First?
Although it is a generally accepted custom to shake hands
when meeting a person for the first time, there are some cir-
cumstances in which it may not be appropriate for you to
initiate a handshake. Considering that a handshake is a sign of
trust and welcome, it is important to ask yourself several ques-
tions before you initiate the hand shake: Am I welcome? Is this
person happy to meet me or am I forcing them into it? Sales-
People are taught that if they initiate a handshake with a
customer on whom they call unannounced or uninvited, it can
Produce a negative result as the buyer may not want to

--- Page 36 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
welcome them and feels forced to shake hands. Under these
circumstances, salespeople are advised that it is better to wait
for the other person to initiate the handshake and, if it is not
forthcoming, use a small head-nod as the greeting. In some
countries, shaking hands with a woman is still an uncertain
practice (for example, in many Muslim countries it would be
considered rude to do so; instead a small head-nod is accept-
able), but it's now been found that women who initiate a firm
handshake are rated — in most places — as more open-minded
and make better first impressions.
How Dominance and Control Are
Communicated
Considering what has already been said about the impact of
the Palm-Up and Palm-Down gestures, let's explore their rele-
vance in handshaking.
In Roman times, two leaders would meet and greet each
other with what amounted to a standing version of modern
arm wrestling. If one leader was stronger than the other, his
hand would finish above the other's hand in what became
known as the
 Upper Hand
 position.
Let's assume that you have just met someone for the first
time and you greet each other with a handshake. One of three
basic attitudes is subconsciously transmitted:
1. Dominance: 'He is trying to dominate me. I'd better be
cautious.'
2. Submission: 'I can dominate this person. He'll do what I
want.'
3. Equality: 'I feel comfortable with this person.'
These attitudes are sent and received without our being aware
of them, but they can have an immediate impact on the
outcome of any meeting. In the 1970s we documented the
effect of these handshake techniques in our business skills
42

--- Page 37 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_037_00.jpeg]

The Power Is in Your Hands
classes and taught them as business strategies, which, with a
little practice and application, can dramatically influence any
face-to-face meeting, as you will see.
Dominance is transmitted by turning your hand (striped
sleeve) so that your palm faces down in the handshake (see
below). Your palm doesn't have to face directly down, but is
the upper hand and communicates that you want to take
control of the encounter.
Our study of 350 successful senior management executives
(89% of whom were men) revealed that not only did almost all
of the managers initiate the handshake, 88% of males and
31% of females also used the dominant handshake position.
Power and control issues are generally less important to
women, which probably accounts for why only one in three
women attempted the Upper Hand ritual. We also found that
some women will give men a soft handshake in some social
contexts to imply submissiveness. This is a way of highlighting
their femininity or implying that domination of her may be
possible. In a business context, however, this approach can be
disastrous for a woman because men will give attention to her
feminine qualities and not take her seriously. Women who
display high femininity in business meetings are not taken seri-
ously by other business women or men, despite the fact that
it's now fashionable or politically correct to say everyone is the
43
Taking control

--- Page 38 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_038_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
same. This doesn't mean a woman in business needs to act in
a masculine way; she simply needs to avoid signals of female-
ness such as soft handshakes, short skirts and high heels if she
wants equal credibility.
Women who show high feminine signals in
a serious business meeting lose credibility.
In 2001, William Chaplin at the University of Alabama con-
ducted a study into handshakes and found that extroverted
types use firm handshakes while shy, neurotic personalities
don't. Chaplin also found that women who are open to new
ideas used firm handshakes. Men used the same handshakes
whether they were open to new ideas or not. So it makes good
business sense for women to practise firmer handshaking, par-
ticularly with men.
The Submissive Handshake
The opposite of the dominant handshake is to offer your hand
(striped sleeve) with your palm facing upwards (as below),
symbolically giving the other person the upper hand, like a
dog exposing its throat to a superior dog.
The submissive handshake
44

--- Page 39 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_039_00.jpeg]

The Power Is in Your Hands
This can be effective if you want to give the other person
control or allow him to feel that he is in charge of the situation
if for example, you were making an apology.
While the palm-up handshake can communicate a submis-
sive attitude, there are sometimes other circumstances to
consider. As we have seen, a person with arthritis in their
hands will be forced to give you a limp handshake because of
their condition and this makes it easy to turn their palm into
the submissive position. People who use their hands in their
profession, such as surgeons, artists and musicians, may also
give a limp handshake, purely to protect their hands. The
gesture clusters they use following their handshake will give
further clues for your assessment of them - a submissive
person will use more submissive gestures and a dominant
person will use more assertive gestures.
How to Create Equality
When two dominant people shake hands, a symbolic power
struggle takes place as each person attempts to turn the other's
palm into the submissive position. The result is a vice-like
handshake with both palms remaining in the vertical position
and this creates a feeling of equality and mutual respect
because neither is prepared to give in to the other.
Communicating equality
45

--- Page 40 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
How to Create Rapport
There are two key ingredients for creating rapport in a hand-
shake. First, make sure that yours and the other person's palms
are in the vertical position so that no one is dominant or sub!
missive. Second, apply the same pressure you receive. This
means that if, on a firmness scale of 1-10, your handshake
registers a 7 but the other person is only a 5, you'll need to
back off 20% in strength. If their grip is a 9 and yours is a
7, you'll need to increase your grip by 20%. If you were
meeting a group of ten people, you'd probably need to make
several adjustments of angle and intensity to create a feeling
of rapport with everyone and to stay on an equal footing
with each person. Also keep in mind that the average male
hand can exert around twice the power of the average female
hand, so allowances must be made for this. Evolution has
allowed male hands to exert a grip of up to 100 pounds (45kg)
for actions such as tearing, gripping, carrying, throwing and
hammering.
Remember that the handshake evolved as a gesture to say
hello or goodbye or to seal an agreement so it always needs to
be warm, friendly and positive.
How to Disarm a Power Player
The
 Palm-Down Thrust
 is reminiscent of the Nazi salute and
is the most aggressive of all handshakes because it gives the
receiver little chance of establishing an equal relationship. This
handshake is typical of the overbearing, dominant person who
always initiates it, and their stiff arm with palm facing down-
wards forces the receiver into the submissive position.
46

--- Page 41 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_041_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_041_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_041_02.jpeg]

The Power Is in Your Hands
The Palm-Down Thrust
If you feel someone is giving a Palm-Down Thrust to you on
purpose, here are several counters to it:
1.The Step-to-the-RightTechnique
If you receive a dominant handshake from a power player —
and it's mostly men who do it - it is not only difficult to turn
his palm back up into an equal position, but it's obvious when
you do it.
This technique involves first stepping forward with your left
foot as you reach to shake hands. This takes a little practice, as
stepping forward on the right foot is the natural position for
90% of people when shaking with the right hand.
The power player attempts to control 
Step forward on your left foot
47

--- Page 42 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_042_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Next, step forward with your right leg, moving across in front
of the person and into his personal space. Finally, bring your
left leg across to your right leg to complete the manoeuvre (see
below), and shake the person's hand. This tactic allows you to
straighten the handshake or even turn it over into the submis-
sive position. It feels as if you're walking across in front of him
and is the equivalent of winning an arm-wrestling bout. It also
allows you to take control by invading his personal space.
Walk across in front with your right leg
and turn his palm up
Analyse your own approach to shaking hands and notice
whether you step forward on your left or right foot when
you extend your arm to shake hands. Most people are right
footed and are therefore at a disadvantage when they receive a
dominant handshake because they have little room to move
and it allows the other person to dominate. Practise stepping
into a handshake with your
 left
 foot and you will find that it
is easier to deal with the power players who would try to
control you.
48

--- Page 43 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_043_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_043_01.jpeg]

The Power Is in Your Hands
2.The Hand-on-Top Technique
When a power player presents you with a Palm-Down Thrust,
respond with your hand in the Palm-Up position then put your
left hand over his right to form a
 Double-Hander
 and
straighten the handshake.
This switches the power from him to you and is a much
simpler way of dealing with the situation, and is much easier
for women to use. If you feel the power player is purposefully
trying to intimidate, and he does it regularly, grasp his hand on
top and then shake it (as below). This can shock a power
player so you need to be selective when using it and do it only
as a last resort.
The last resort
The Cold, Clammy Handshake
No one likes receiving a handshake that feels like you've been
handed four cold breakfast sausages. If we become tense when
meeting strangers, blood diverts away from the cells below the
49
The Double-Hander

--- Page 44 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
outer layer of the skin on the hands - known as the dermis -
and goes to the arm and leg muscles for 'fight or flight' prepa-
ration. The result is that our hands lose temperature and
begin to sweat, making them feel cold and clammy and result-
ing in a handshake that feels like a wet salmon. Keep a
handkerchief in a pocket or handbag so that you can dry your
palms immediately before meeting someone important so you
don't make a poor first impression. Alternatively, before a new
meeting, simply visualise that you are holding your palms in
front of an open fire. This visualisation technique is proven
to raise the temperature of the average person's palm by
3-4 degrees.
Gaining the Left Side Advantage
When two leaders stand side by side for media photographs,
they try to appear equal in physical size and dress code but
the one who stands to the left of the picture is perceived by
viewers to have a dominant edge over the other. This is because
it is easier to gain the upper hand when they shake, making
the one to the left of the photograph appear to be in control.
This is obvious in the handshake that took place between
John F Kennedy and Richard Nixon prior to their television
debate in 1960. At that time the world was ignorant about
body language but, on analysis, JFK appears to have had an
intuitive understanding about how to use it. He made a prac-
tice of standing on the left-hand side of a photograph, and
applying the Upper-Hand position was one of his favourite
moves.
50

--- Page 45 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_045_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_045_01.jpeg]

The Power Is in Your Hands
Gaining the Upper Hand -
JFK using the left-hand
side advantage to put
Richard Nixon into the
weaker-looking position
Their famous election debate revealed a remarkable testimony
to the power of body language. Polls showed that the majority
of Americans who listened to the debate on radio believed that
Nixon was the victor but the majority of those who watched it
on television believed Kennedy to be the clear winner. This
shows how Kennedy's persuasive body language made the dif-
ference and eventually won him the Presidency.
Standing on the left side of
shot gives Bill Clinton the
Upper Hand advantage over
Tony Blair

--- Page 46 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_046_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_046_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_046_02.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
World leaders approaching from
the wrong side — the right side of
the photograph — and walking into
a dominant handshake
When Men and Women Shake Hands
Even though women have had a strong presence in the work-
force for several decades, many men and women still
experience degrees of fumbling and embarrassment in
male/female greetings. Most men report that they received
some basic handshaking training from their fathers when they
were boys, but few women report the same training. As adults,
this can create uncomfortable situations when a man reaches
first to shake a woman's hand but she may not see it — she's ini-
tially more intent on looking at his face. Feeling awkward with
his hand suspended in mid-air, the man pulls it back hoping
she didn't notice but as he does, she reaches for it and is also
left with her hand dangling in a void. He reaches for her hand
again and the result is a mish-mash of tangled fingers that
look and feel like two eager squid in a love embrace.
52

--- Page 47 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_047_00.jpeg]

The Power Is in Your Hands
Initial meetings between men and women can
be thrown off by poor handshake technique.
If this ever happens to you, intentionally take the other
person's right hand with your left, place it correctly into your
right hand and say with a smile 'Let's try that again!' This can
give you an enormous credibility boost with the other person,
because it shows you care enough about meeting them to get
the handshake right. If you are a woman in business, a wise
strategy is to give notice to others that you intend to shake
hands so as to not catch them off guard. Hold your hand out
as early as possible to give clear notice of your intention to
shake hands and this will avoid any fumbling.
The Double-Hander
A corporate favourite the world over, this is delivered with
direct eye-contact, a candidly reassuring smile and a confident
loud repetition of the receiver's first name, often accompanied
by an earnest inquiry about the receiver's current state of
health.
The Double-Hander
This handshake increases the amount of physical contact
given by the initiator and gives control over the receiver by
53

--- Page 48 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_048_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
restricting his right hand. Sometimes called the 'politician's
handshake', the initiator of the
 Double-Hander
 tries to give
the impression he is trustworthy and honest, but when it's
used on a person he's just met, it can have the reverse effect
leaving the receiver feeling suspicious about the initiator's
intentions. The Double-Hander is like a miniature hug and is
acceptable only in circumstances where a hug could also be
acceptable.
'You're a lovable, memorable person -
whoever you are...'
Ninety per cent of humans are born with the ability to throw
the right arm in front of the body - known as an over-arm
blow - for basic self-defence. The Double-Hander restricts this
defence capability, which is why it should never be used in
greetings where a personal bond doesn't exist with the other
person. It should be used only where an emotional bond
already exists, such as when meeting an old friend. In these cir-
cumstances, self-defence is not an issue so the handshake is
perceived as genuine.
54

--- Page 49 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_049_00.jpeg]

The Power Is in Your Hands
Yassar Arafat plants a Double-Hander on Tony Blair,
whose tight-lipped expression shows he's not impressed
Handshakes of Control
The intention of any two-handed handshake is to try to show
sincerity, trust or depth of feeling for the receiver. Two signifi-
cant elements should be noticed. Firstly, the left hand is used
to communicate the depth of feeling the initiator wants to
convey and this is relative to the distance the initiator's left
hand is placed up the receiver's right arm. It's like an intention
to embrace and the initiator's left hand is used like a ther-
mometer of intimacy - the further up the receiver's arm it's
placed, the more intimacy the initiator is attempting to show.
The initiator is both attempting to show an intimate connec-
tion with the receiver while, at the same time, attempting to
control their movement.
For example, the
 Elbow Grasp
 conveys more intimacy and
control than the
 Wrist Hold,
 and the
 Shoulder Hold
 conveys
more than the
 Upper-Arm Grip.
55

--- Page 50 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_050_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_050_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_050_02.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_050_03.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
The Wrist Hold
The Elbow Grasp
The Upper-Arm Grip
The Shoulder Hold
Secondly, the initiator's left hand is an invasion of the
receiver's personal space. In general, the Wrist Hold and the
Elbow Grasp are acceptable only where one person feels close
to the other and in these cases the initiator's left hand enters
only the outer edge of the receiver's personal space. The
Shoulder Hold and Upper-Arm Grip show close intimacy and
may even result in a hug ('personal space' will be covered more
in Chapter 11). Unless the intimate feelings are mutual or the
initiator doesn't have a good reason for using a double-handed
handshake, the receiver will probably be suspicious and mis-
trust the initiator's intentions. In summary, if you don't have
56

--- Page 51 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_051_00.jpeg]

The Power Is in Your Hands
some sort of personal bond with the other person, don't use
any Double-Hander. And if the person who gives you one
doesn't have a personal connection with you, look for their
hidden agenda.
Unless you and the other person have a personal or
emotional bond, only use a single-handed handshake.
It's common to see politicians greeting voters using double-
handed handshakes and businesspeople doing it to clients
without realising it can be business and political suicide,
putting people offside.
The Blair-Bush Power Game
During the Iraq conflict in 2003, George W Bush and Tony
Blair presented to the media the image of a powerful alliance
that was 'united and equal', but close analysis of photographs
shows strong power plays by George Bush.
Out-dressed and out-gunned: George Bush
putting the Upper Hand on Tony Blair
57

--- Page 52 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
In the above picture, Bush leans in to deliver the Upper Hand
from the left side of the photograph. Bush is dressed like an
Armed Forces Commander-in-Chief and Blair is dressed like
an English schoolboy meeting the headmaster. Bush has his
feet firmly planted together on the ground and is using a Back
Hold to control Blair. Bush regularly jockeys for the position
left-of-picture, allowing him to be perceived as dominant and
to look as if he were calling the shots.
The Solution
To avoid losing power if you inadvertently find yourself on the
right-of-picture, extend your arm early as you approach from
a distance as this forces the other person to face you straight
on to shake hands. This lets you keep the handshake on an
equal basis. If photos or video are being shot, always approach
the other person so you occupy the left-of-picture position. At
worst, use a Double-Hander to give yourself an equal footing.
The World's Eight Worst Handshakes
Here are eight of the world's most annoying and disliked
handshakes and their variations. Avoid them at all times:
1.The Wet Fish
Credibility Rating: 1/10.
Few greetings are as uninviting as the
 Wet Fish,
 particularly
when the hand is cold or clammy. The soft, placid feel of the
Wet Fish makes it universally unpopular and most people
associate it with weak character, mainly because of the ease
with which the palm can be turned over. It is read by the
receiver as a lack of commitment to the encounter, but there
may be cultural or other implications - in some Asian and
African cultures a limp handshake is the norm and a firm
handshake can be seen as offensive. Also, one in twenty people
58

--- Page 53 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_053_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_053_01.jpeg]

The Power Is in Your Hands
suffer from a condition called hyperhydrosis, which is a
genetic condition that causes chronic sweating. It's wise to
carry tissues or a handkerchief for mop-up strategies before
any bout of handshaking.
The Wet Fish
The palms have more sweat glands than any other part of the
body, which is why sweaty palms become so obvious. Surpris-
ingly, many people who use the Wet Fish are unaware they do
it so it's wise to ask your friends to comment on your hand-
shake style before deciding what you'll use in future meetings.
2.The Vice
Credibility Rating: 4/10.
This quietly persuasive style is a favourite of men in business
and reveals a desire to dominate and assume early control of
the relationship or put people in their place. The palm is pre-
sented in the down position with one sharp downward pump
followed by two or three vigorous return strokes and a grip
that can even stop blood flow to the hand. Sometimes it will be
used by a person who feels weak and fears they will be domi-
nated by others.
The Vice
59

--- Page 54 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_054_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
3. The Bone-Crusher
Credibility Rating: 0/10.
A second cousin to the
 Vice,
 the
 Bone-Crusher
 is the most
feared of all handshakes as it leaves an indelible memory on
the recipient's mind and fingers and impresses no one other
than the initiator. The Bone-Crusher is the trademark of the
overly aggressive personality who, without warning, seizes the
early advantage and attempts to demoralise his opponent by
grinding his knuckles to a smooth paste. If you are female,
avoid wearing rings on your right hand in business encounters
as the Bone-Crusher can draw blood and leave you to open
your business dealings in a state of shock.
The Bone-Crusher
Unfortunately, there are no effective ways to counter it. If you
believe someone has done it on purpose, you could bring it to
everyone's attention by saying, 'Ouch! That really hurt my
hand. Your grip is too strong.' This puts the advocate of the
Bone-Crusher on notice not to repeat the behaviour.
4. The Finger-Tip Grab
Credibility Rating: 2/10.
A common occurrence in male—female greetings, the
 Finger-
Tip Grab
 is a handshake that missed the mark and the user
mistakenly grabs the other person's fingers. Even though the
initiator may seem to have an enthusiastic attitude towards the
receiver, he in fact lacks confidence in himself. In these cir-
cumstances, the main aim of the Finger-Tip Grab is to keep
60

--- Page 55 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_055_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_055_01.jpeg]

The Power Is in Your Hands
the receiver at a comfortable distance. The Finger-Tip Grab
can also result from personal space differences between the
people in the handshake. This could happen if one person's
intimate space was two feet (60cm) and the other's was three
feet (90cm), the latter stands further back during greeting so
the hands don't connect properly.
The Stiff-Arm Thrust
61
If this happens to you, take the other person's right hand with
your left and place it correctly in your right hand and say, with
a smile 'Let's try that again!' and shake hands equally. This
builds your credibility because you are telling the other person
that you think they are important enough for you to get it
right.
5.The Stiff-Arm Thrust
Credibility Rating: 3/10.
Like the Palm-Down Thrust, the
 Stiff-Arm Thrust
 tends to be
used by aggressive types and its main purpose is to keep you at
a distance and away from their personal space. It's also used by
people raised in rural areas, who have larger personal space
needs and want to protect their territory.

--- Page 56 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_056_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
These people will even lean forward or balance on one foot to
keep their distance when delivering a Stiff-Arm Thrust.
6. The Socket-Wrencher
Credibility Rating: 3/10.
A popular choice of power players and common cause of
watering eyes and, in extreme cases, torn ligaments. This is the
father of the
 Bent-Arm-Pull-In,
 and involves forcefully grip-
ping the receiver's outstretched palm, then simultaneously
applying a sharp reverse thrust, attempting to drag the receiver
into the initiator's territory. This results in loss of balance and
gets the relationship off on the wrong foot.
The Socket-Wrencher
Pulling the receiver into the initiator's territory can mean one
of three things: first, the initiator is an insecure type who feels
safe only within his own personal space; second, the initiator
is from a culture that has smaller space needs; or third, he
wants to control you by pulling you off balance. Either way, he
wants the encounter to be on his terms.
7.The Pump Handle
Credibility Rating: 4/10.
With strong rural overtones, the pumper grabs the hand of the
pumpee and commences an energetic and rhythmic series of
rapid vertical strokes.
While up to seven pumps is acceptable, some pumpers con-
tinue to pump uncontrollably as if they are trying to draw
water from the pumpee.
62

--- Page 57 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_057_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_057_01.jpeg]

The Power Is in Your Hands
The Pump Handle
Occasionally, the pumper will cease pumping but continue to
hold the receiver's hand to prevent their escape and, interest-
ingly, few people try to pull their hand away. The act of being
physically connected seems to weaken our resolve to retreat.
8.The Dutch Treat
Credibility Rating: 2/10.
Being somewhat vegetarian in approach, this handshake has
its origins in the Netherlands, where a person can be accused
of 'Geeft 'n hand als bosje worteljes' meaning 'Giving a hand-
shake like a bunch of carrots'. It's a distant relative of the Wet
Fish but stiffer and less clammy to the touch.
The Dutch Treat
63

--- Page 58 ---

The Power Is in Your Hands
Summary
Few people have any idea how they come across to others in
initial meetings, despite the fact that most of us are aware that
the first few minutes of that meeting can make or break a rela-
tionship. Take the time to practise handshake styles with your
friends and colleagues and you can quickly learn how to
deliver a positive handshake every time. Keeping the palms
held vertical and matching the other person's grip is usually
perceived as a 10/10 handshake.
65

--- Page 59 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_059_00.jpeg]

Chapter 3
THE MAGIC OF SMILES
AND LAUGHTER
What makes this one of the
world's most irresistible icons?
Bob gazed across the room and locked eyes with an attractive
brunette. She seemed to smile at him and, not being slow on
the uptake, he swiftly crossed the room and began a conver-
sation with her. She didn't seem to talk much but she was still
smiling at him so he persisted. One of his female friends
sauntered past and whispered, 'Forget it Bob...she thinks
you're a jerk.' He was stunned. But she was still smiling
at him! As with most men, Bob didn't understand the nega-
tive significance of the tight-lipped, no-teeth-visible female
smile.
Children were often told by their grandmothers to 'put on
a happy face', 'wear a big smile' and 'show your pearly
'whites' when meeting someone new because Grandma knew,
on an intuitive level, it would produce a positive reaction
in others.
The first recorded scientific studies into smiling were in the
66

--- Page 60 ---

The Magic of Smiles and Laughter
early part of the nineteenth century when French scientist
Guillaume Duchenne de Boulogne used electrodiagnostics and
electrical stimulation to distinguish between the smile of real
enjoyrnent and other kinds of smiling. He analysed the heads
of people executed by guillotine to study how the face muscles
worked. He pulled face muscles from many different angles
to catalogue and record which muscles caused which smiles.
He discovered that smiles are controlled by two sets of
muscles: the
 zygomatic major
 muscles, which run down the
side of the face and connect to the corners of the mouth
and the
 orbicularis oculi,
 which pull the eyes back. The zygo-
matic majors pull the mouth back to expose the teeth and
enlarge the cheeks, while the orbicularis oculi make the eyes
narrow and cause 'crow's feet'. These muscles are important to
understand because the zygomatic majors are consciously con-
trolled - in other words, they are used to produce false smiles
of fake enjoyment to try to appear friendly or subordinate.
The orbicularis oculi at the eyes act independently and reveal
the true feelings of a genuine smile. So the first place to check
the sincerity of a smile is to look for wrinkle lines beside
the eyes.
A natural smile produces characteristic
wrinkles around the eyes
 -
 insincere
people smile only with their mouth.
In the enjoyment smile, not only are the lip corners pulled up,
but the muscles around the eyes are contracted, while non-
enjoyment smiles involve just the smiling lips.
67

--- Page 61 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_061_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
It has been superseded in younger generations by
 De Slappe
Vaatdoek,
 or
 Sloppy Dishcloth.
 This needs no further expla-
nation.
The Arafat-Rabin Handshake
The photograph below shows the late Israeli Prime Minister,
Yitzhak Rabin and Palestinian Chairman Yassar Arafat
shaking hands at the White House in 1993 and it reveals
several interesting attitudes. President Clinton is, in fact, the
key figure in the shot because of his unobstructed centre posi-
tion, extra height and
 Arms-Spread-Open-Palms
 gesture,
reminiscent of a god presiding over his people. Clinton's
 Half-
Moon, Lips-Sucking
 smile shows the emotional restraint he
either felt or faked.
Yitzhak Rabin (left) holds his ground using a Stiff-Arm Thrust to resist
being pulled forward as Yassar Arafat attempts a Bent-Arm-Pull-In
In this famous shot, both men keep their feet firmly planted on
the ground and attempt to force the other out of his territory-
Yitzhak Rabin assumed the power position on the left side of
the picture and used a Stiff-Arm Thrust and leaned forward to
keep Arafat out of his personal space while Yassar Arafat
stood absolutely erect and attempted to counter with a Bent-
Arm-Pull-in.
64

--- Page 62 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_062_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_062_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Which smile is fake?
False smiles pull back only the mouth, real smiles pull
back both the mouth and eyes
Scientists can distinguish between genuine and fake smiles by
using a coding system called the Facial Action Coding System
(FACS), which was devised by Professor Paul Ekman of the
University of California and Dr Wallace V Friesen of the Uni-
versity of Kentucky. Genuine smiles are generated by the
unconscious brain, which means they are automatic. When
you feel pleasure, signals pass through the part of your brain
that processes emotion, making your mouth muscles move,
your cheeks raise, your eyes crease up and your eyebrows dip
slightly.
Photographers ask you to say 'Cheese' because this word
putts back the zygomatic major muscles. But the result is
a false smile and an insincere looking photograph.
Lines around the eyes can also appear in intense fake smiles
and the cheeks may bunch up, making it look as if the eyes are
contracting and that the smile is genuine. But there are signs
68

--- Page 63 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_063_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_063_01.jpeg]

The Magic of Smiles and Laughter
that distinguish these smiles from genuine ones. When a smile
is genuine, the fleshy part of the eye between the eyebrow and
the eyelid - the eye cover fold - moves downwards and the end
of the eyebrows dip slightly.
Smiling Is a Submission Signal
Smiling and laughing are universally considered to be signals
that show a person is happy. We cry at birth, begin smiling at
five weeks and laughing starts between the fourth and fifth
months. Babies quickly learn that crying gets our attention -
and that smiling keeps us there. Recent research with our
closest primate cousins, the chimpanzees, has shown that
smiling serves an even deeper, more primitive purpose.
To show they're aggressive, apes bare their lower fangs,
warning that they can bite. Humans do exactly the same thing
when they become aggressive by dropping or thrusting
forward the lower lip because its main function is as a sheath
to conceal the lower teeth. Chimpanzees have two types of
smiles: one is an appeasement face, where one chimp shows
submission to a dominant other. In this chimp smile - known
as a 'fear face' - the lower jaw opens to expose the teeth and
the corners of the mouth are pulled back and down, and this
resembles the human smile.
A primate
'fear face' (left)
and a primate
'play face'
69

--- Page 64 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_064_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
The other is a 'play face' where the teeth are exposed, the
corners of the mouth and the eyes are drawn upwards and
vocal sounds are made, similar to that of human laughing. In
both cases, these smiles are used as submission gestures. The
first communicates 'I am not a threat because, as you can see,
I'm fearful of you' and the other says 'I am not a threat
because, as you can see, I'm just like a playful child'. This is the
same face pulled by a chimpanzee that is anxious or fearful
that it may be attacked or injured by others. The zygomatics
pull the corners of the mouth back horizontally or downwards
and the orbicularis eye muscles don't move. And it's the same
nervous smile used by a person who steps onto a busy road and
almost gets killed by a bus. Because it's a fear reaction, they
smile and say, 'Gee...I almost got killed!'
In humans, smiling serves much the same purpose as with
other primates. It tells another person you are non-threatening
and asks them to accept you on a personal level. Lack of
smiling explains why many dominant individuals, such as
Vladimir Putin, James Cagney, Clint Eastwood, Margaret
Thatcher and Charles Bronson, always seem to look grumpy
or aggressive and are rarely seen smiling - they simply don't
want to appear in any way submissive.
And research in courtrooms shows that an apology offered
with a smile incurs a lesser penalty than an apology without
one. So Grandma was right.
Happy, submissive or
about to tear you limb
from limb?
70

--- Page 65 ---

The Magic of Smiles and Laughter
Why Smiling Is Contagious
The remarkable thing about a smile is that when you give it to
someone, it causes them to reciprocate by returning the smile,
even when you are both using fake smiles.
Professor Ulf Dimberg at Uppsala University, Sweden, con-
ducted an experiment that revealed how your unconscious
mind exerts direct control of your facial muscles. Using equip-
ment that picks up electrical signals from muscle fibres, he
measured the facial muscle activity on 120 volunteers while
they were exposed to pictures of both happy and angry faces.
They were told to make frowning, smiling or expressionless
faces in response to what they saw. Sometimes the face they
were told to attempt was the opposite of what they saw -
meeting a smile with a frown, or a frown with a smile. The
results showed that the volunteers did not have total control
over their facial muscles. While it was easy to frown back at a
picture of an angry man, it was much more difficult to pull a
smile. Even though volunteers were trying consciously to
control their natural reactions, the twitching in their facial
muscles told a different story - they were
 mirroring
 the expres-
sions they were seeing, even when they were trying not to.
Professor Ruth Campbell, from University College London,
believes there is a 'mirror neuron' in the brain that triggers the
part responsible for the recognition of faces and expressions
and causes an instant mirroring reaction. In other words,
whether we realise it or not, we automatically copy the facial
expressions we see.
This is why regular smiling is important to have as a part of
your body language repertoire, even when you don't feel like it,
because smiling directly influences other people's attitudes and
how they respond to you.
Science has proved that the more you smile, the
more positive reactions others will give you.
71

--- Page 66 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_066_00.jpeg]

How a Smile Tricks the Brain
The ability to decode smiles appears to be hardwired into the
brain as an aid to survival. Because smiling is essentially a sub-
mission signal, ancestral men and women needed to be able to
recognise whether an approaching stranger was friendly or
aggressive, and those who failed to do this perished.
72
The Definitive Book of Body Language
In over 30 years of studying the sales and negotiating process
we have found that smiling at the appropriate time, such as
during the opening stages of a negotiating situation where
people are sizing each other up, produces a positive response
on both sides of the table that gives more successful outcomes
and higher sales ratios.
Do you recognise this actor?
When you look at the above photograph you'll probably iden-
tify actor Hugh Grant. When asked to describe his emotions in
this shot, most people describe him as relaxed and happy
because of his apparent smiling face. When the shot is turned
the right way up, you get a completely different view of the
emotional attitude conveyed.

--- Page 67 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_067_00.jpeg]

The Magic of Smiles and Laughter
We cut and pasted Grant's eyes and smile to produce a hor-
rific-looking face but, as you can see, your brain can even
identify a smile when a face is upside down. Not only can it do
that, but the brain can separate the smile from every other part
of the face. This illustrates the powerful effect a smile has on
us.
Practising the Fake Smile
As we've said, most people can't consciously differentiate
between a fake smile and a real one, and most of us are
content if someone is simply smiling at us — regardless of
whether it's real or false. Because smiling is such a disarming
gesture, most people wrongly assume that it's a favourite of
liars. Research by Paul Ekman showed that when people delib-
erately lie, most, especially men, smile
 less
 than they usually
do. Ekman believes this is because liars realise that most
people associate smiling with lying so they intentionally
decrease their smiles. A liar's smile comes more quickly than a
genuine smile and is held much longer, almost as if the liar is
wearing a mask.
A false smile often appears stronger on one side of the face
73

--- Page 68 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_068_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
than the other, as both sides of the brain attempt to make it
appear genuine. The half of the brain's cortex that specialises
in facial expressions is in the right hemisphere and sends
signals mainly to the left side of the body. As a result, false
facial emotions are more pronounced on the left side of the
face than the right. In a real smile, both brain hemispheres
instruct each side of the face to act with symmetry.
When liars lie, the left side of the smile is
usually more pronounced than the right
Smugglers Smile Less
We were commissioned by Australian Customs, in 1986, to
help create a programme to increase the number of seizures of
illegal contraband and drugs being smuggled into Australia-
Until that time, it had been assumed by law enforcement offi-
cers that liars increased their frequency of smiling when they
were lying or under pressure. Our analysis of film of people
who were intentionally told to lie showed the opposite - when
the liars lied, they smiled less or not at all, regardless of
culture. People who were innocent and telling the truth
increased
 their smiling frequency when being honest. Because
smiling is rooted in submission, the innocent people were
attempting to appease their accusers while the professional
liars were reducing their smiles and other body signals. It's the
74

--- Page 69 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_069_00.jpeg]

The Magic of Smiles and Laughter
same as when a police car pulls up next to you at traffic lights
-even though you haven't broken the law, the presence of the
police is enough to make you feel guilty and start smiling. This
highlights how fake smiling is controlled and should always be
considered in the context of where it occurs.
Five Common Types of Smiles
What follows is a summary and an analysis of the common
types of smiles that you're likely to see every day:
1.The Tight-Lipped Smile
The lips are stretched tight across the face to form a straight
line and the teeth are concealed. It sends the message that the
smiler has a secret or a withheld opinion or attitude that they
will not be sharing with you. It's a favourite of women who
don't want to reveal that they don't like someone and is
usually clearly read by other women as a rejection signal. Most
men are oblivious to it.
The Tight-Lipped Smile shows she has a
secret and won't be sharing it with you
75
for example, one woman might say of another woman, 'She's
a very capable woman who knows what she wants', followed
by a tight-lipped 
smile, rather than saying what she was really

--- Page 70 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_070_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
thinking: 'I think she's an aggressive, pushy bitch!' The
 Tight-
Lipped Smile
 is also seen in magazine pictures of successful
businessmen who are communicating 'I've got the secrets of
success and you've got to try and guess what they are.' In these
interviews, the men have a tendency to talk about principles of
success but rarely do they reveal the exact details of how they
succeeded. Conversely, Richard Branson is always seen sport-
ing a wide toothy smile and is happy to explain the exact
details of his success because he knows that most people won't
do it anyway.
Tony and Cherie Blair were 'tight lipped'
about Cherie's last pregnancy
2.The Twisted Smile
This smile shows opposite emotions on each side of the face.
In picture A below, the right brain raises the left side eyebrow,
the left zygomatic muscles and left cheek to produce one type
of smile on the left side of the face while the left brain pulls the
same muscles downwards on the right side to produce an
angry frown. When you place a mirror down the middle of
illustration A, at an angle of 90 degrees to reflect each side of
the face, you produce two completely different faces with
opposite emotions. Mirroring the right side of the face reveals
picture B, which has a cheesy grin, while mirroring the left side
(picture C) reveals an angry frown.
76

--- Page 71 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_071_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_071_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_071_02.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_071_03.jpeg]

The Magic of Smiles and Laughter
The
 Twisted Smile
 is peculiar to the Western world and can
only be done deliberately which means it can send only one
message - sarcasm.
3. The Drop-Jaw Smile
This is a practised smile where the lower jaw is simply dropped
down to give the impression that the person is laughing or
playful. This is a favourite of people such as The Joker in
Batman, Bill Clinton and Hugh Grant, all of whom use it to
engender happy reactions in their audiences or to win more
votes.
Drop-Jaw smile with an attempt
to fake smiling eyes
77
A
B
C

--- Page 72 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_072_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_072_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
A Drop-Jaw smile where only the jaw
is lowered to feign enjoyment
4. Sideways-Looking-Up Smile
With the head turned down and away while looking up with a
Tight-Lipped Smile, the smiler looks juvenile, playful and
secretive. This coy smile has been shown to be men's favourite
everywhere, because when a woman does it, it engenders
parental male feelings, making men want to protect and care
for females. This is one of the smiles Princess Diana used to
captivate the hearts of people everywhere.
Diana's Sideways-Looking-Up smile had a
powerful effect on both men and women
78

--- Page 73 ---

The Magic of Smiles and Laughter
This smile made men want to protect her, and made women
want to be like her. Not surprisingly, this smile is a regular in
men's courtship repertoire for attracting men as it's read by
as seductive and is a powerful 'come-on' signal. This is
the same smile now used by Prince William, which not only
has the effect of winning people's affection, it also reminds
them of Diana.
5.The George W Bush Grin
President George W Bush always has a permanent smirk on his
face. Ray Birdwhistell found that smiling among middle-class
people is most common in Atlanta, Louisville, Memphis,
Nashville and most of Texas. Bush is a Texan and they smile
more than most other Americans. As a result, in Texas, an
unsmiling individual might be asked if he was 'angry about
something', while in New York, the smiler might be asked,
'What's so funny?' President Jimmy Carter was also a South-
erner who smiled all the time. This worried the Northerners
who feared that he knew something they didn't.
Smile constantly. Everyone will
wonder what you've been up to.
Why Laughter Is the Best Medicine
As with smiling, when laughter is incorporated as a permanent
part of who you are, it attracts friends, improves health and
extends life. When we laugh, every organ in the body is affected
a positive way. Our breathing quickens, which exercises the
diaphragm, neck, stomach, face and shoulders. Laughter
creases the amount of oxygen in the blood, which not only
helps healing and improves circulation, it also expands the
blood vessels close to the skin's surface. This is why people go
in the face when they laugh. It can also lower the heart rate,
dilate the arteries, stimulate the appetite and burn up calories.
79

--- Page 74 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Neurologist Henri Rubenstein found that one minute of
solid laughter provides up to 45 minutes of subsequent relax-
ation. Professor William Fry at Stanford University reported
that 100 laughs will give your body an aerobic workout equal
to that of a ten-minute session on a rowing machine. Med-
ically speaking, this is why a damn good laugh is damn good
for you.
The older we become, the more serious we become
about life. An adult laughs an average of 15 times a day;
a preschooler laughs an average of 400 times.
Why You Should Take Laughter Seriously
Research shows that people who laugh or smile, even when they
don't feel especially happy, make part of the 'happy zone' in the
brain's left hemisphere surge with electrical activity. In one of
his numerous studies on laughter, Richard Davidson, professor
of psychology and psychiatry at the University of Wisconsin in
Madison, hooked subjects up to EEG (electroencephalograph)
machines, which measure brain wave activity, and showed them
funny movies. Smiling made their happy zones click wildly. He
proved that intentionally producing smiles and laughter moves
brain activity towards spontaneous happiness.
Arnie Cann, professor of psychology at the University of
North Carolina, discovered that humour has a positive impact
in counteracting stress. Cann led an experiment with people
who were showing early signs of depression. Two groups
watched videos over a three-week period. The group that
watched comedy videos showed more improvement in their
symptoms than did a control group that watched non-humor-
ous videos. He also found that people with ulcers frown more
than people without ulcers. If you catch yourself frowning'
practise putting your hand on your forehead when you talk, to
train yourself out of it.
80

--- Page 75 ---

The Magic of Smiles and Laughter
Why We Laugh and Talk, But Chimps Don't
Robert Provine, professor of psychology at the University of
Maryland, Baltimore, found that human laughter is different
from that of our primate cousins. Chimpanzee laughter
sounds like panting, with only one sound made per outward or
inward breath. It's this one-to-one ratio between breath cycle
and vocalisation that makes it impossible for most primates to
speak. When humans began walking upright, it freed the
upper body from weight-bearing functions and allowed better
breath control. As a result, humans can chop an exhalation
and modulate it to produce language and laughter. Chimps
can have linguistic concepts, but they can't physically make the
sounds of language. Because we walk upright, humans have a
huge range of freedom in the sounds we make, including
speech and laughter.
How Humour Heals
Laughter stimulates the body's natural painkillers and 'feel
good' enhancers, known as endorphins, helping relieve stress
and heal the body. When Norman Cousins was diagnosed with
the debilitating illness ankylospondylitis, the doctors told him
they could no longer help him and that he would live in excru-
ciating pain before he died. Cousins checked into a hotel room
and hired every funny movie he could find: the Marx Brothers,
Airplane
 and
 The Three Stooges,
 etc. He watched and re-
watched them over and over, laughing as hard and loud as he
could. After six months of this self-inflicted laughter therapy,
the doctors were amazed to find that his illness had been com-
etely cured - the disease was gone! This amazing outcome
led to the publishing of Cousins' book,
 Anatomy of an Illness,
and the start of massive research into the function of endor-
phins. Endorphins are chemicals released from the brain when
you laugh. They have a similar chemical composition to mor-
phine and heroin and have a tranquillising effect on the body,
81

--- Page 76 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
while building the immune system. This explains why happy
people rarely get sick and miserable but complaining people
often seem to be ill.
Laughing Till You Cry
Laughter and crying are closely linked from a psychological
and physiological standpoint. Think of the last time someone
told you a joke that made you buckle up with laughter and you
could hardly control yourself. How did you feel afterwards?
You felt a tingling sensation all over, right? Your brain released
endorphins into your system that gave you what was once
described as a 'natural high' and is the same experience that
drug addicts get when they take dope. People who have trouble
with laughing at the tough things in life often turn to drugs
and alcohol to achieve the same feeling that endorphin-
induced laughter produces. Alcohol loosens inhibitions and
lets people laugh more, which releases endorphins. This is why
most well-adjusted people laugh more when they drink
alcohol, while unhappy people become even more despondent
or even violent.
People drink alcohol and take drugs to try to feel
how happy people feel normally.
Paul Ekman found that one of the reasons we are attracted to
smiling and laughing faces is because they can actually affect
our autonomic nervous system. We smile when we see a
smiling face and this releases endorphins into our system. If
you are surrounded by miserable, unhappy people you are also
likely to mirror their expressions and become morose or
depressed.
82

--- Page 77 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_077_00.jpeg]

The Magic of Smiles and Laughter
Working in an unhappy environment is
detrimental to your health.
How Jokes Work
The basis of most jokes is that, at the punch line, something
disastrous or painful happens to someone. In effect, the unex-
pected ending 'frightens' our brain, and we laugh with sounds
similar to a chimp warning others of imminent danger. Even
though we consciously know that the joke is not a
 real
 event,
our laugh releases endorphins for self-anaesthesis as if the
joke was a real event. If it
 was
 a real event, we may go into
crying mode and the body would also release its endorphins.
Crying is often an extension of a laughing bout and is why, in
a serious emotional crisis, such as hearing about a death, a
person who cannot mentally accept the death may begin
laughing. When the reality hits, the laughter turns to crying.
The origin of human laughter is as a
primate warning signal
The Laughter Room
the 1980s, several American hospitals introduced the
concept of the 'Laughter Room'. Based on Norman Cousins'
83

--- Page 78 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
experiences and other laughter research by Dr Patch Adams,
they allocated a room and filled it with joke books, comedy
films and humorous tapes, and had regular visits from cornedi-
ans and clowns. Patients were then exposed to 30- to 60-minute
sessions each day. The result was impressive - a dramatic
improvement in patient health and shorter average hospitalisa-
tion time per patient. The Laughter Rooms also showed a
decrease in the number of painkillers required by those in pain
and patients became easier to deal with. So you could say that
the medical profession now take their laughter seriously.
He
 who laughs, lasts.
Smiles and Laughter Are a Way of Bonding
Robert Provine found that laughing was more than 30 times as
likely to occur in participants in a social situation than in a
solitary setting. Laughter, he found, has less to do with jokes
and funny stories and more to do with building relationships.
He found that only 15% of our laughter has to do with jokes.
In Provine's studies, participants were more likely to speak to
themselves when alone than they were to laugh. Participants
were videotaped watching a humorous video clip in three dif-
ferent situations: alone, with a same-sex stranger and with a
same-sex friend.
Only 15% of our laughter has to do with
jokes. Laughter has more to do with bonding.
Even though no differences existed between how funny the par-
ticipants felt the video clip was, those who watched the amusing
video clips alone laughed significantly less than did those who
watched the video clip with another person present, whether it
was a friend or a stranger. The frequency and time spent laugh-
84

--- Page 79 ---

Humour Sells
Karen Machleit, professor of marketing at the University of
Cincinnati's College of Business Administration, found that
adding humour to advertisements increases sales. She found that
humour makes it more likely that consumers will accept an
advertiser's claims and increases source credibility, so that a funny
ad with a famous person becomes even more readily accepted.
The Permanent Down-Mouth
The opposite to pulling up the corners of the mouth to show
happiness is pulling both corners downward to show the
Down-Mouth
 expression. This is done by the person who feels
unhappy, despondent, depressed, angry or tense. Unfortu-
nately, if a person holds these negative emotions throughout
their lifetime, the corners of the mouth will set into a perma-
nent down position.
In later life, this can give a person an appearance similar to
a bulldog. Studies show that we stand further away from
people who have this expression, give them less eye contact
and avoid them when they are walking towards us. If you dis-
over that the Down-Mouth has crept into your repertoire,
practise smiling regularly, which will not only help you avoid
looking like an angry canine in later life, but will make you feel
more positive. It will also help you avoid frightening little chil-
dren and being thought of as a grumpy old cow.
85
The Magic of Smiles and Laughter
ing were significantly greater in both situations involving
other person than when the participant was alone. Laughter
occurred much more frequently during social interaction. These
suits demonstrate that the more social a situation is, the more
often people will laugh and the longer each laugh will last.

--- Page 80 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_080_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_080_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
The Down-Mouth expression can become a permanent
facial feature. Our intuition tells us to stay away from those
with a Down-Mouth expression.
Smiling Advice For Women
Research by Marvin Hecht and Marianne La France from
Boston University has revealed how subordinate people smile
more in the presence of dominant and superior people, in both
friendly and unfriendly situations, whereas superior people
will smile only around subordinate people in friendly situa-
tions.
This research shows that women smile far more than men in
both social and business situations, which can make a woman
appear to be subordinate or weak in an encounter with
unsmiling men. Some people claim that women's extra smiling
is the result of women historically being placed by men into
subordinate roles, but other research shows that by the age of
eight weeks, baby girls smile far more than baby boys, so it's
probably inborn as opposed to learned. The likely explanation
is that smiling fits neatly into women's evolutionary role as
pacifiers and nurturers. It doesn't mean a woman can't be as
authoritative as a man; but the extra smiling can make her
look less authoritative.
86

--- Page 81 ---

The Magic of Smiles and Laughter
Women's extra smiling is probably
hardwired into
 the
 brain.
Social psychologist Dr Nancy Henley, at UCLA, described a
woman's smile as 'her badge of appeasement' and it is often
used to placate a more powerful male. Her research showed
that, in social encounters, women smile 87% of the time
versus
 67%
 for men and that women are 26% more likely to
return smiles from the opposite sex. An experiment using 15
photographs of women showing happy, sad and neutral faces
were rated for attractiveness by 257 respondents. The women
with the sad expressions were considered the least attractive.
Pictures of unsmiling women were decoded as a sign of
unhappiness while pictures of unsmiling men were seen as a
sign of dominance. The lessons here are for women to smile
less when dealing with dominant men in business or to mirror
the amount of smiling that men do. And if men want to be
more persuasive with women, they need to smile more in all
contexts.
Laughter In Love
Robert Provine found that in courtship, it's also women who
do most of the laughing and smiling, not men. Laughing in
these contexts is used as a way of determining how success-
fully a couple is likely to bond in a relationship. Simply put,
the more he can make her laugh, the more attractive she will
find him. This is because the ability to make others laugh is
perceived as a dominant trait and women prefer dominant
males, while males prefer subordinate females. Provine also
round that a subordinate person will laugh to appease a supe-
rior person and the superior person will make subordinates
laugh - but without laughing himself — as a way of maintain-
ing his superiority.
87

--- Page 82 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_082_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_082_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Studies show that women lough at men they're attracted
 to,
and men are attracted to women who laugh at them.
This explains why having a sense of humour is near the top of
women's priority list of what they look for in a man. When a
woman says 'He's such a funny guy - we spent the whole night
laughing together' she usually means that
 she
 spent the night
laughing and he spent the night
 making
 her laugh.
From a man's perspective, saying that a
woman has a good sense of humour doesn't mean
she tells jokes; it means she laughs at
 his
 jokes.
On a deeper level, men seem to understand the attraction value
of being humorous and spend much of their time with other
men competing to tell the best joke to enhance their own status.
Many men also become annoyed when one man dominates the
joke-telling, especially when women are present and are also
laughing. Men are likely to think the joke-teller is not only a jerk
but he isn't particularly funny either, come to think of it - despite
the fact he has all the women in fits of laughter. The point for
men to understand is that humorous men look more attractive to
most women. Fortunately, you can learn to be humorous.
How a woman
sees a man: the
picture on the
left is how a
woman perceives
the man who
doesn't make her
laugh. The right
hand picture
is how she sees
him when he
does
 make her
laugh
88

--- Page 83 ---

The Magic of Smiles and Laughter
Summary
89
When you smile at
t
 another person they will almost always
return the smile, which causes positive feelings in both you and
them, because of cause and effect. Studies prove that most
encounters will run more smoothly, last longer, have more pos-
itive outcomes and dramatically improve relationships when
you make a point of regularly smiling and laughing to the
point where it becomes a habit.
Evidence shows conclusively that smiles and laughter build
the immune system, defend the body against illness and
disease, medicate the body, sell ideas, teach better, attract
more friends and extend life. Humour heals.

--- Page 84 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_084_00.jpeg]

Chapter 4
ARM SIGNALS
Holding the hands over the crotch makes men
feel more secure when they feel threatened
Arm Barrier Signals
Hiding behind a barrier is a normal response we learn at an
early age to protect ourselves. As children, we hid behind solid
objects such as tables, chairs, furniture and mother's skirt
whenever we found ourselves in a threatening situation. As we
grew older, this hiding behaviour became more sophisticated
and by the age of about six, when it was unacceptable behav-
iour to hide behind solid objects, we learned to fold our arms
tightly across our chests whenever a threatening situation
arose. During our teens, we learned to make the crossed-arms
gesture less obvious by relaxing our arms a little and combin-
ing the gesture with crossed legs.
As we grow older, the arm-crossing gesture can evolve to the
point where we try to make it even less obvious to others. By
90

--- Page 85 ---

Arm Signals
folding one or both arms across the chest, a barrier is formed
that is an unconscious attempt to block out what we perceive
threat or undesirable circumstances. The arms fold neatly
across the heart and lungs regions to protect these vital organs
from being injured, so it's likely that arm-crossing is inborn.
Monkeys and chimps also do it to protect themselves from a
frontal attack. One thing's certain: when a person has a
nervous, negative or defensive attitude, it's very likely he will
fold his arms firmly on his chest, showing that he feels threat-
ened.
Why Crossed Arms Can be Detrimental
Research conducted in the United States into the
 Crossed-
Arms
 gesture has shown some worrying results. A group of
volunteers was asked to attend a series of lectures and each
student was instructed to keep his legs uncrossed, arms
unfolded and to take a casual, relaxed sitting position. At the
end of the lectures each student was tested on his retention
and knowledge of the subject matter and his attitude towards
the lecturer was recorded. A second group of volunteers was
put through the same process, but these volunteers were
instructed to keep their arms tightly folded across their chests
throughout the lectures. The results showed that the group
with the folded arms had learned and retained 38% less than
the group who kept its arms unfolded. The second group also
had a more critical opinion of the lectures and of the lecturer.
When
 you fold your arms your
credibility dramatically reduces.
We conducted these same tests in 1989 with 1500 delegates
during 6 different lectures and recorded almost identical results.
These tests reveal that, when a listener folds his arms, not only
does he have more negative thoughts about the speaker, but he's
9 I

--- Page 86 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
also paying less attention to what's being said. It's for this
reason that training centres should have chairs with arms to
allow the attendees to leave their arms uncrossed.
Yes...But I'm Just 'Comfortable'
Some people claim that they habitually cross their arms
because it's comfortable. Any gesture will feel comfortable
when you have the corresponding attitude; that is, if you have
a negative, defensive or nervous attitude, folded arms will feel
comfortable. If you're having fun with your friends, folded
arms will feel wrong.
Remember that with all body language, the meaning of the
message is also in the receiver, as well as the sender. You may feel
'comfortable' with your arms crossed and your back and neck
stiffened, but studies have shown that others' reactions to these
gestures is negative. So the lesson here is clear - avoid crossing
your arms under any circumstances unless your intention is to
show others you don't agree or don't want to participate.
You
 may feel arm-crossing is simply comfortable
but others will think you're not approachable.
Gender Differences
Men's arms rotate slightly inwards while women's arms rotate
slightly outwards. These rotation differences have enabled men
to aim and throw more accurately, while women's splayed
elbows give them a wider, more stable position for carrying
babies. One interesting difference is that women tend to keep
their arms more open when they are around men they find
attractive and are likely to fold their arms across their breasts
around aggressive or unattractive men.
92

--- Page 87 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_087_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_087_01.jpeg]

Arm Signals
Inward rotating arms allow
men to throw accurately;
women's outward rotating
arms make for better carrying
Crossed-Arms-on-Chest
Both arms are folded together across the chest as an attempt to
put a barrier between the person and someone or something
they don't like. There are many arm-folding positions and
we'll discuss here the most common ones you're likely to see.
Crossed-Arms-on-Chest
 is universal and is decoded with the
same defensive or negative meaning almost everywhere. It is
commonly seen among strangers in public meetings, in queues
or cafeteria lines, elevators or anywhere that people feel uncer-
tain or insecure.
Crossed-Arms-on-Chest:
he's not coming out and
you're not coming in
93

--- Page 88 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
We attended a meeting of our local council where a debate was
held on the cutting down of trees by developers. The develop-
ers sat to one side of the room and their opponents, the
'greenies', sat on the other. About half those attending sat
with their arms crossed at the opening of the meeting and this
increased to 90% of the 'greenies' when the developers
addressed the audience, and almost 100% of the developers
did it when the 'greenies' spoke. This shows how most people
will take an arms-folded position when they disagree with
what they're hearing. Many speakers fail to communicate
their message to their audience because they haven't seen the
crossed-arms position of their listeners. Experienced speakers
know that this gesture means a good 'ice breaker' is needed to
move their audience into a more receptive position that will
change their attitude from negative to positive.
When you see someone take the arms-crossed position, it's
reasonable to assume that you may have said something with
which they disagree. It may be pointless continuing your line
of argument even though the person could be verbally agree-
ing with you. The fact is that body language is more honest
than words.
As long as someone holds an arms-folded
position, a negative attitude will persist.
Your objective should be to try to work out why they crossed
their arms and to try to move the person into a more receptive
position. The attitude causes the gesture to occur and main-
taining the gesture forces the attitude to remain.
Solution
A simple but effective way of breaking the arms-folded posi-
tion is to give the listener something to hold or give them
something to do. Giving them a pen, book, brochure, sample
94

--- Page 89 ---

Reinforced Arm-Crossing
If a person has clenched fists as well as a full arm-cross, this
cluster, called
 Fists-Clenched-Arm-Crossed,
 shows hostility as
well as defensiveness. If it's combined with a tight-lipped smile
or clenched teeth and red face, a verbal or even physical attack
could happen. A conciliatory approach is needed to discover
what is causing it if the reason is not already apparent. This
person has an aggressive, attacking attitude.
95
written test forces them to unfold their arms and lean
forward. This moves them into a more open position and,
therefore, a more open attitude. Asking someone to lean
forward to look at a visual presentation can also be an effec-
tive means of opening the arms-folded position. You could
also lean forward with your palms up and say, 'I can see you
have a question...what would you like to know?' or, 'What's
your opinion?' You then sit or lean back to indicate that it's
their turn to speak. By using your palms you non-verbally tell
them that you would like them to be open and honest because
that's what you're being.
Arm Signals
Why
 am I holding all these pens, pencils and brochures?'
asked the customer, who began to look like a decorated
Xmas tree. I'll come to that later,' said the negotiator.
Salespeople and negotiators are often taught that it's usually
safer not to proceed with the presentation of a product or idea
until the prospect's reason for folding his arms is uncovered.
More often than not, buyers have hidden objections that most
salespeople never discover because they missed seeing the
buyer's arms-folded cluster, signalling that he was feeling neg-
ative about something.

--- Page 90 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_090_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_090_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Fists-Clenched-Arms-
Crossed shows a hostile
attitude exists
Arm-Gripping
The
 Double-Arm-Grip
 is characterised by the person's hands
tightly gripping their upper arms to reinforce themselves and
avoid exposure of the front of the body. Sometimes the arms
can be gripped so tight that the fingers and knuckles can turn
white as blood circulation is cut off. It's a person's way of com-
forting himself with a form of self-hugging. Arm-gripping is
commonly seen in doctors' and dentists' waiting rooms or
with first-time air travellers who are waiting for lift-off. It
shows a negative, restrained attitude.
The Double-Arm-Grip:
feeling insecure and not
buying what you're selling
In a courtroom, the claimant may be seen using a Fists-
Clenched-Arm-Crossed pose while the defendant may have
taken the Double-Arm-Grip position.
96

--- Page 91 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_091_00.jpeg]

Arm Signals
The Boss vs The Staff
Status can influence arm-folding gestures. A superior type can
make his superiority felt by
 not
 folding his arms, saying, in
effect, 'I'm not afraid, so I'll keep my body open and vulnera-
ble.' Let's say, for example, that at a company social function,
the general manager is introduced to several new employees.
playing greeted them with a Palm-Down handshake, he stands
back from them - a yard away (1 metre) - with his hands by
his side or behind his back in the Prince Philip
 Palm-in-Palm
position (superiority), or with one or both hands in his pocket
(non-involvement). He rarely folds his arms across his chest so
as not to show the slightest hint of nervousness.
Conversely, after shaking hands with the boss, the new
employees may take full or partial arm-crossing positions
because of their apprehension about being in the presence of
the company's top person. Both the general manager and the
new employees feel comfortable with their respective gesture
clusters as each is signalling his status, relative to the other. But
what happens when the general manager meets a young, up-
and-coming male who is also a superior type and who may
even signal that he is as important as the general manager?
The likely outcome is that, after the two give each other a
dominant handshake, the younger executive may take an arm-
fold gesture with both thumbs pointing upwards.
Thumbs-Up: defensive,
but he still thinks he's
pretty cool
97

--- Page 92 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
This gesture has the arms-crossed plus both thumbs up
showing that he's feeling 'cool' and in control. As he talks, he
gestures with his thumbs to emphasise points he is making, As
we've already discussed, the thumbs-up gesture is a way of
showing others we have a self-confident attitude and the
folded arms still gives a feeling of protection.
Someone who is feeling defensive but also submissive at the
same time will sit in a symmetrical position, which means one
side of their body is a perfect mirror of the other. They display
tense muscle tone and look as if they expect to be attacked
whereas a person who is feeling defensive and dominant will
take an asymmetrical pose, that is, one side of the body
doesn't mirror the other.
Getting theThumbs-Up
When you're presenting your case to someone and the
Thumbs-Up-Arms-Crossed
 appears towards the end of your
presentation and is clustered with other positive gestures, it
signals you can move comfortably into asking the person for a
commitment. On the other hand, if at the close of the presen-
tation the other person takes the
 Fists-Clenched-Arms-
Crossed
 position and has a poker face, you can be inviting
trouble by attempting to get a 'yes'. It would be better to ask
questions to try to uncover the person's objections. When
someone says 'no' to a proposal, it can become difficult to
change their mind without looking as if you're aggressive. The
ability to read body language allows you to 'see' a negative
decision before it is verbalised and gives you time to take an
alternative course of action.
When you can
 see
 a 'no' before it's said,
you can try a different approach.
98

--- Page 93 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_093_00.jpeg]

Arm Signals
People carrying weapons or wearing armour seldom use arm-
gestures because their weapon or armour provides
sufficient body protection. Police officers who wear guns, for
example, rarely cross their arms unless they are standing guard
and they normally use the fist-clenched position to communicate
clearly that nobody is permitted to pass where they are standing.
Hugging Yourself
When we were children our parents or carers embraced or
hugged us when we faced distressing or tense circumstances. As
adults, we often attempt to recreate those same comforting
feelings when we find ourselves in stressful situations. Rather
than take a full arm-cross gesture, which can tell everyone we
are fearful, women often substitute a subtler version - a
 Partial-
Arm-Cross,
 where one arm swings across the body to hold or
touch the other arm to form the barrier and it looks as if she is
hugging herself. Partial arm barriers are often seen in meetings
where a person may be a stranger to the group or is lacking in
self-confidence. Any woman taking this position in a tense sit-
uation will usually claim she is just being 'comfortable'.
Holding herself like
her mother held her
when she was a child
99
Men use a partial arm barrier known as
 Holding-Hands-With-
Yourself
 : it's commonly used by men who stand in front of a

--- Page 94 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_094_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_094_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_094_02.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
crowd to receive an award or give a speech. Also known as the
Broken Zipper Position
 it makes a man feel secure because he
can protect his 'crown jewels' and can avoid the consequences
of receiving a nasty frontal blow.
The Broken
Zipper Position
It's the same position men take in a line at a soup kitchen or to
receive social security benefits and reveals their dejected, vulner-
able feelings. It recreates the feeling of having someone else hold
your hand. Adolf Hitler used it regularly in public to mask the
sexual inadequacy he felt because of having only one testicle.
It's possible that evolution shortened men's arms to allow
them to take this protective
position because when our
closest primate cousins, the
chimpanzees, assume the
same position their hands
cross at their knees.
Humans make a point of hiding
the areas they think are their
weakest or most vulnerable
100

--- Page 95 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_095_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_095_01.jpeg]

Arm Signals
How the Rich and Famous Reveal
their Insecurity
People who are continually exposed to others, such as royalty,
politicians, television personalities and movie stars, usually
don't want their audiences to detect that they are nervous or
unsure of themselves. They prefer to project a cool, calm, con-
trolled attitude when on display, but their anxiety or
apprehension leaks out in disguised forms of arm-crossing. As
in all arm-cross gestures, one arm swings across in front of the
body towards the other arm but instead of the arms crossing,
one hand touches or holds on to a handbag, bracelet, watch,'
shirt cuff or object on or near their other arm. Once again the
barrier is formed and the secure feeling is achieved.
Famous people are just
as nervous in public as
the rest of us
Men wearing cufflinks are often
seen adjusting them as they cross
a room or dance floor where they
are in full view of others. The
Cuff-Link-Adjust
 
is the trade-
mark of Prince Charles, who uses
it to give himself a feeling of
security any time he walks across
an open space in full view of
everyone.
Prince Charles' Cuff-Link-Adjust
revealing his insecurities
101

--- Page 96 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_096_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
You would think that after more than half a century of being
scrutinised in public and being confronted by large crowds
royals, such as Prince Charles, would be resistant to nervous
feelings but his small arm-crossing behaviours reveal that he
feels just as insecure as you or I would feel in the same cir-
cumstances.
An anxious or self-conscious man will also be seen adjust-
ing the band on his watch, checking the contents of his wallet
clasping or rubbing his hands together, playing with a button
on his cuff or using any gesture that lets his arms cross in front
of his body. A favourite of insecure businessmen is walking
into a business meeting holding a briefcase or folder in front
of the body. To the trained observer, these gestures are a give-
away because they achieve no real purpose except as an
attempt to disguise nervousness. A good place to observe these
gestures is anywhere that people walk past a group of onlook-
ers, such as a man who crosses the dance floor to ask a woman
to dance or someone who crosses a stage to receive an award.
Women's use of disguised arm barriers is less noticeable
than men's because women can grasp onto things like hand-
bags or purses if they become self-conscious or unsure of
themselves. Royals like Princess Anne regularly clutch a bunch
of flowers when walking in public and the
 Flowers/Handbag-
Clutch
 is Queen Elizabeth's favourite. It's unlikely that she
would be carrying lipstick, make-up, credit cards and theatre
tickets in her handbag. Instead, she uses it as a type of security
blanket when necessary and as a means of sending messages;
royal watchers have recorded 12 signals she sends to her
minders about when she wants to go, stop, leave or be rescued
from someone who is boring her.
Handbag used to
form a barrier
02

--- Page 97 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_097_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_097_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_097_02.jpeg]

Arm Signals
Flower grasping shows
self-consciousness
The Coffee Cup Barrier
Offering a refreshment during a negotiation is an excellent
strategy for gauging how the other person is receiving your
offer. Where a person places their cup immediately after they
take a drink is a strong indicator of whether or not they are
convinced or open to what you are saying. Someone who is
reeling hesitant, unsure or negative about what they are
hearing will place their cup to the opposite side of their body
to form a single arm barrier. "When they are accepting of what
they are hearing they place the cup to the side of their body
showing an open or accepting attitude.
The arm barrier says 'no' 
She's now open to your ideas
03
One of the most common versions of creating a subtle barrier
is to hold a glass or cup with two hands. You need only one
hand to hold a glass but two hands allows the insecure person
form an almost unnoticeable arm barrier. These types of
gestures are used by almost everyone and few of us are aware
that we're doing them.

--- Page 98 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Sitting with your elbows on the armrest of a chair is a position
of power and conveys a strong, upright image. Humble
defeated individuals let the arms drop inside the arms of the
chair, so avoid this at all times unless your goal is to appear
defeated.
The Power of Touch
Touching a person with your left hand while shaking hands
with your right hand can create a powerful result.
Researchers at the University of Minnesota conducted an
experiment that became known as 'The Phone Booth Test'.
They placed a coin on the ledge of a telephone booth then hid
behind a tree and waited for an unsuspecting subject to walk
in and find it. When this happened, one of the researchers
would approach the subject and say, 'Did you happen to see
my coin in that phone booth? I need it to make another call.'
Only 23% of the subjects admitted they had found it and gave
it back.
In the second part of the study, the coin was again placed in
the phone booth but when the researchers approached the
people who took it, they touched them lightly on the elbow for
not longer than three seconds and inquired about the coin.
This time, 68% admitted to having the coin, looked embar-
rassed and said things like, 'I was looking around to try to see
who owned it...'
Skilful elbow-touching can give you up to three
times the chance of getting what you want
There are three reasons this technique works: first, the elbow
is considered a public space and is far away from intimate
parts of the body; second, touching a stranger is not consid-
ered acceptable in most countries so it creates an impression;
and third, a light, three-second elbow touch creates a momen-
104

--- Page 99 ---

Arm Signals
tary bond between two people. When we replicated this exper-
iment for a television programme, we found the coin return
rate varied from culture to culture depending on what the
normal touch frequency was in a particular place. For
example, with elbow touching, the coin was returned by 72%
of Australians, 70% of English, 85% of Germans, 50% of
French and 22% of Italians. This result shows how the elbow
touch works better in places where frequent touching is
 not
 the
cultural norm. We have recorded the touch frequencies
between people in outdoor cafes in many of the countries we
regularly visit and noted 220 touches an hour in Rome, 142 per
hour in Paris, 25 touches an hour in Sydney, 4 per hour in New
York and 0 per hour in London. This confirms that the more
British or German your heritage, the less likely you are to
touch others and, therefore, the more successful an elbow
touch will be on you.
If you're of German or British origin,
you're an easier touch than everyone else.
Overall, we found that women were four times more likely to
touch another woman than was a man to touch another man.
In many places, touching a stranger
 above
 or
 below
 the elbow
did not produce the same positive results as with directly
touching the elbow and often received negative reactions.
Touching for more than three seconds also received a negative
response, with the person suddenly looking down at your
hand to see what you are doing.
Touch their Hand Too
Another study involved librarians who, as they issued a book
to a borrower, lightly brushed the hand of the person borrow-
ing the book. Outside the library, the borrowers were surveyed
and asked questions about their impressions of the service the
105

--- Page 100 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
library offered. Those who had been touched responded more
favourably to all questions asked and were more likely to recall
the name of the librarian. Studies conducted in British super,
markets where customers are lightly touched on the hand
when they received their change show similar positive cus-
tomer reactions. The same experiment has also been
conducted in the USA with waitresses who derive much of
their income from customer tips. The elbow-and-hand touch-
ing waitresses made 36% more tips from male diners than
non-touching waitresses and male waiters increased their
earnings by 22% regardless of which sex they touched.
When you next meet someone new and you shake hands,
extend your left arm, give a light touch on their elbow or hand
as you shake, repeat their name to confirm you heard it cor-
rectly, and watch their reaction. Not only does it make that
person feel important, it lets you remember their name
through repetition.
Elbow-and hand-touching — when done discreetly - grabs
attention, reinforces a comment, underlines a concept,
increases your influence over others, makes you more memo-
rable and creates positive impressions on everyone.
Summary
It makes no difference how you look at it, any crossing of the
arms in front of the body is seen as negative and the message
is as much in the mind of the receiver as the sender. Even if you
fold your arms because, for example, you have a backache, an
observer will still unconsciously perceive you as closed to their
ideas. Make a decision now to practise
 not
 crossing your arms
and in the following chapters we will show you what to do to
project a more positive, confident image.
106

--- Page 101 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_101_00.jpeg]

Chapter 5
CULTURAL DIFFERENCES
How would a Brit, a German or an
American interpret this gesture?
Imagine this scene - you are inspecting a house with the pos-
sibility of purchasing it and you open a bathroom door to see
a woman sitting naked in a bathtub. How would you expect
the surprised woman to react? A British or American woman
would cover her breasts with one hand and her genitals with
the other, while a Swedish woman would cover only her geni-
tals. A Muslim woman would cover her face, a Sumatran
woman would cover her knees and a Samoan only her navel.
We Were Having Pizza at the Time
As we are writing this chapter, we are in Venice, Italy speaking
at a conference on cultural differences. If we had never travelled
to Italy, we would have been shocked by what we'd experienced.
All cultures walk on the same side of the pavement as they drive
on the road. This means if you're British, Australian, South
African or a New Zealander, you drive and walk to the left. The
consequence is that you'd find the Italians constantly bumping
into you as you walk on the pavement because, as they approach
107

--- Page 102 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
and you step to your left, they step to their right. Wearing sun-
glasses in foreign countries is the single biggest cause of
pavement collisions between cultures because no one can see the
other person's gaze to know which way they intend to step. But
it's a novel way of meeting new and interesting foreigners.
You'd also be stunned when you go to shake hands to say
goodbye to an Italian but, instead, you get a kiss on both cheeks.
As I departed, the Italian man kissed me on both cheeks.
I was tying my shoelaces at the time.
WOODY ALLEN
As you talk with local Italians, they seem to stand in your
space, continually grabbing you, talking over the top of you,
yelling in fact, and sounding angry about everything. But these
things are a normal part of everyday friendly Italian commu-
nication. Not all things in all cultures mean the same things.
Take the Cultural Test
How aware are you of cultural differences in body language?
Try this exercise — hold up your main hand to display the
number five - do it now. Now change it to the number two. If
you're Anglo-Saxon, there's a
 96%
 chance you'll be holding up
your middle and index fingers. If you're European, there's a
94% chance you'll be holding up your thumb and index finger.
Europeans start counting with the number one on the thumb,
two on the index finger, three on the middle finger, and so on.
Anglo-Saxons count number one on the index finger, two on
the middle finger and finish with five on the thumb.
Now look at the following hand signals and see how many
different meanings you can assign to each one. For each correct
answer, score one point and deduct one point for an incorrect
answer. The answers are listed at the bottom of the page.
108

--- Page 103 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_103_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_103_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_103_02.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_103_03.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_103_04.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_103_05.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_103_06.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_103_07.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_103_08.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_103_09.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_103_10.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_103_11.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_103_12.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_103_13.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_103_14.jpeg]

Cultural Differences
G
H
K
L
M
N
O
For each correct answer you got, allocate yourself one point.
A. Europe and North America: OK
Mediterranean region, Russia, Brazil, Turkey:
An orifice signal; sexual insult; gay man
Tunisia, France, Belgium: Zero; worthless
Japan: Money; coins
B.Western countries: One; Excuse me!; As God is my
witness; No! (to children)
C. Britain, Australia, New Zealand, Malta: Up yours!
USA: Two
Germany: Victory
France: Peace
Ancient Rome: Julius Caesar ordering five beers
109
A
B
C
D
E
F
I
J

--- Page 104 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
D. Europe: Three
Catholic countries: A blessing
E. Europe: Two
Britain, Australia, New Zealand: One
USA: Waiter!
Japan: An insult
F. Western countries: Four
Japan: An insult
G. Western countries: Number 5
Everywhere: Stop!
Greece and Turkey: Go to hell!
H.Mediterranean: Small penis
Bali: Bad
Japan: Woman
South America: Thin
France: You can't fool me!
I. Mediterranean: Your wife is being unfaithful
Malta and Italy: Protection against the Evil Eye (when
pointed)
South America: Protection against bad luck (when rotated)
USA: Texas University Logo, Texas Longhorn Football
Team
J. Greece Go to Hell!
The West: Two
K.Ancient Rome: Up yours!
USA: Sit on this! Screw you!
L.Europe: One
Australia: Sit on this! (upward jerk)
Widespread: Hitchhike; Good; OK
110

--- Page 105 ---

Cultural Differences
Greece: Up yours! (thrust forward)
Japan: Man; five
M.. Hawaii: 'Hang loose'
Holland: Do you want a drink?
N.. USA: I love you
O. The West: Ten; I surrender
Greece: Up Yours — twice!
Widespread: I'm telling the truth
What did you score?
Over 30 points: You are a well-travelled, well-rounded,
broad-thinking person who gets on well with everyone
regardless of where they are from. People love you.
15-30 points: You have a basic awareness that others behave
differently to you and, with dedicated practice, you can
improve the understanding you currently have.
15 points or less: You think everyone thinks like you do. You
should never be issued a passport or even be allowed out of
the house. You have little concept that the rest of the world is
different to you and you think that it's always the same time
and season all over the world. You are probably an American.
Why We're All Becoming American
Due to the wide distribution of American television and
movies, the younger generations of all cultures are developing
a generic form of North American body language. For
example, Australians in their sixties will identify the British
Two-Fingers-Up
 gesture as an insult whereas an Australian
teenager is more likely to read it as the number two and will
recognise the American
 Middle-Finger-Raised
 as a main form
insult. Most countries now recognise the
 Ring
 gesture as
meaning 'OK', even if it's not traditionally used locally. Young
111

--- Page 106 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
children in every country that has television now wear baseball
caps backwards and shout 'Hasta la vista, baby', even if the
don't understand Spanish.
American television is the prime reason cultural
body language differences are disappearing.
The word 'toilet' is also slowly disappearing from the English
language because North Americans, who are rugged pioneers
and log splitters, are terrified to say it. North Americans will
ask for the 'bathroom', which, in many parts of Europe, con-
tains a bath. Or they ask for a 'rest room' and are taken to
where there are lounge seats to relax. In England, a 'powder
room' contains a mirror and washbasin, a 'little girls' room' is
found in a kindergarten and 'comfort stations' are positioned
on the motorways of Europe. And a North American who
asks to 'wash up' is likely to be gleefully led to the kitchen,
given a tea towel and invited to wash the dishes.
Cultural Basics are the Same Almost
Everywhere
As discussed in Chapter 3, facial expressions and smiles regis-
ter the same meanings to people almost everywhere. Paul
Ekman of the University of California, San Francisco, showed
photographs of the emotions of happiness, anger, fear,
sadness, disgust and surprise to people in 21 different cultures
and found that in
 every
 case, the majority in each country
agreed about the pictures that showed happiness, sadness and
disgust. There was agreement by the majority in 20 out of the
21 countries for the surprise expressions, for fear on 19 out of
21 agreed and for anger, 18 out of 21 agreed. The only signifi-
cant cultural difference was with the Japanese who described
the fear photograph as surprise.
Ekman also went to New Guinea to study the South Fore
112

--- Page 107 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_107_00.jpeg]

lated from the rest of the world. He recorded the same results,
the exception being that, like the Japanese, these cultures
could not distinguish fear from surprise.
He filmed these stone-age people enacting these same
expressions and then showed them to Americans who cor-
rectly identified them all, proving that the meanings of smiling
and facial expressions are universal.
The fact that expressions are inborn in humans was also
demonstrated by Dr Linda Camras from DePaul University in
Chicago. She measured Japanese and American infants' facial
responses using the Facial Action Coding System (Oster &
Rosenstein, 1991). This system allowed researchers to record,
separate and catalogue infant facial expressions and they
found that both Japanese and American infants displayed
exactly the same emotional expressions.
So far in this book we have concentrated on body language
that is generally common to most parts of the world. The
biggest cultural differences exist mainly in relation to territorial
space, eye contact, touch frequency and insult gestures. The
regions that have the greatest number of different local signals
are Arab countries, parts of Asia and Japan. Understanding cul-
tural differences is too big a subject to be covered in one chapter
so we'll stick to the basic things that you are likely to see abroad.
If a Saudi man holds another man's hand in
public it's a sign of mutual respect. But don't
do it in Australia, Texas or Liverpool, England
Cultural Differences
culture and the Dani people of West Irian who had been iso-

--- Page 108 ---

When One Culture Encounters Another
When Italians talk they keep their hands held high as a way of
holding the floor in a conversation. What seems like affection-
114
The Definitive Book of Body Language
Greeting Differences
Handshaking differences can make for some embarrassing and
humorous cultural encounters. British, Australian, New
Zealander, German and American colleagues will usually
shake hands on meeting, and again on departure. Most Euro-
pean cultures will shake hands with each other several times a
day, and some French have been noted to shake hands for up to
30 minutes a day. Indian, Asian and Arabic cultures may con-
tinue to hold your hand when the handshake has ended.
Germans and French give one or two firm pumps followed by
a short hold, whereas Brits give three to five pumps compared
with an American's five to seven pumps. This is hilarious to
observe at international conferences where a range of different
handshake pumping takes place between surprised delegates.
To the Americans, the Germans, with their single pump, seem
distant. To the Germans however, the Americans pump hands
as if they are blowing up an airbed.
When it comes to greeting with a cheek kiss, the Scandina-
vians are happy with a single kiss, the French mostly prefer a
double, while the Dutch, Belgians and Arabs go for a triple
kiss. The Australians, New Zealanders and Americans are
continually confused about greeting kisses and bump noses as
they fumble their way through a single peck. The Brits either
avoid kissing by standing back or will surprise you with a
European double kiss. In his book
 A View from the Summit,
Sir Edmund Hillary recounts that on reaching the peak of
Everest, he faced Sherpa Tenzing Norgay and offered a proper,
British, congratulatory handshake. But Norgay leaped
forward and hugged and kissed him - the proper congratula-
tions of Tibetans.

--- Page 109 ---

Cultural Differences
arm touching during an Italian conversation is nothing
more than a way of stopping the listener from raising his
hands and taking the floor. To interrupt an Italian you must
grab his hands in mid air and hold them down. As a compari-
son the Germans and British look as if they are physically
paralysed when they talk. They are daunted when trying to
converse with Italians and French and rarely get an opportu-
nity to speak. French use their forearms and hands when they
talk, Italians use their entire arms and body, while the Brits
and Germans stand at attention.
When it comes to doing international business, smart attire,
excellent references and a good proposal can all become
instantly unstuck by the smallest, most innocent gesture
sinking the whole deal. Our research in 42 countries shows
North Americans to be the least culturally sensitive people
with the British coming in a close second. Considering that
86% of North Americans don't have a passport, it follows that
they would be the most ignorant of international body lan-
guage customs. Even George W Bush had to apply for a
passport after becoming President of the United States so he
could travel overseas. The Brits, however, do travel extensively
but prefer everyone else to use British body signals, speak
English and serve fish and chips. Most foreign cultures do not
expect you to learn their language but are extremely impressed
by the traveller who has taken the time to learn and use local
body language customs. This tells them that you respect their
culture.
The English Stiff-Upper-Lip
his gesture relates to pursing the lips to control the face so
that facial expressions are reduced and as little emotion as
Possible is shown. This way the English can give the impres-
sion of being in complete emotional control. When Princes
Philip, Charles, Harry and William walked behind the coffin
of Diana in 1997, they each held the
 Stiff-Upper-Lip
 expres-
115

--- Page 110 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_110_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_110_01.jpeg]

Henry VIII popularised this gesture as a high-status signal because
of his small mouth and modern Brits and Americans still use it
The Japanese
One area where handshakes, kissing and bear hugs have not
become established is Japan, where such bodily contact is con-
sidered impolite. Japanese people bow on first meeting, the
person with the highest status bowing the least and the one
with the least status bowing the most. On first meeting, busi-
ness cards are exchanged, each person assesses the others
status and appropriate bowing follows.
The Definitive Book of Body Language
sion, which, to many in the non-British world, came across a
unemotional about Diana's death.
Henry VIII was famous for pulling the
 Lips-Pursed
 expres-
sion. He had a small mouth and when he stiffened his upper
lip for a portrait it looked even smaller. This habit led to a
small mouth being a superiority signal among the English of
the sixteenth century. The Lips-Pursed is an expression still
used today by English people when they feel they are being
intimidated by inferior people and this gesture is often accom-
panied by extended eye blinks.

--- Page 111 ---

Cultural Differences
In Japan, make sure your shoes are spotlessly clean and in
good condition. Every time a Japanese bows, he inspects them.
The Japanese way of listening to someone involves a repertoire
of smiley nods and polite noises, which have no direct equiva-
lent in other languages. The idea is to encourage you to keep
on talking but this is often misinterpreted by Westerners and
Europeans as agreement. The
 Head Nod
 is an almost univer-
sal sign for 'yes', except for the Bulgarians who use the gesture
to signify 'no', and the Japanese who use it for politeness. If
you say something a Japanese doesn't agree with, he'll still say
'yes' - or
 Hai
 in Japanese - to keep you talking. A Japanese
'yes' usually means, 'yes, I heard you' and not 'yes, I agree'. For
example, if you say to a Japanese person 'you don't agree, do
you?' he will nod his head and say 'yes' even though he may
not agree. In the Japanese context, it means 'Yes, you are
correct - I don't agree.'
The Japanese are concerned with saving face and have devel-
oped a set of rules to prevent things going wrong so try to
avoid saying no or asking questions when the answer might be
no. The closest a Japanese will get to saying the word no is, 'It
is very difficult,' or 'We will give this positive study' when they
really mean, 'Let's forget the whole thing and go home.'
'You Dirty, Disgusting Pig!' - Nose Blowing
Europeans and Westerners blow their noses into a handkerchief
or tissue while Asians and Japanese spit or snort. Each is
appalled by what they see as the other's 'disgusting' behaviour.
This dramatic cultural difference is the direct result of the
spead of tuberculosis in past centuries. In Europe, tuberculosis
was the AIDS of the era - a disease from which there was little
hope of survival so governments instructed people to blow their
nose to avoid further spreading the disease. This is why West-
erners react so strongly to spitting - a spitting person could
117

--- Page 112 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
spread tuberculosis around, so people were as alarmed by that
prospect as they would be if you could spread AIDS by spitting.
Modern nose-blowing is the result of a
post epidemic of tuberculosis.
If tuberculosis had been a problem in Eastern countries, the cul-
tural reaction would be the same as with Westerners. As a result
the Japanese are appalled when someone produces a handker-
chief, blows their nose into it and puts it back in their pocket
purse or up their sleeve! Japanese are unimpressed at the English
custom of men wearing a handkerchief in their jacket top
pocket. This is the equivalent of proudly dangling a roll of toilet
paper from the pocket, ready for action. Asians believe, correctly,
that it is a healthier option to spit but it is a habit that is repul-
sive to Westerners and Europeans. This is why business meetings
between Westerners and Europeans can fail when they've all got
a cold. So don't feel upset by an Asian who spits or snorts and
never blow your nose in front of a Japanese person.
The Three Most Common Cross-Cultural
Gestures
Let's examine the cultural interpretations and implications of
three common hand gestures, the
 Ring,
 the
 Thumb-Up
 and the
V-sign.
1.The Ring
This gesture was popularised in the USA during the early nine-
teenth century by the newspapers that were starting a craze or
using initials to shorten common phrases. There are many dif-
ferent views about what the initials 'OK' originally stood for,
some believing it stood for 'all correct' which was regularly
misspelled as 'oil korrect', while others say that it means the
opposite of 'knock-out' that is, KO.
118

--- Page 113 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_113_00.jpeg]

Cultural Differences
'OK' to a Westerner, 'money'
to a Japanese, 'zero' to
the French and insulting to
the Turks and Brazilians
Another popular theory is that it is an abbreviation of 'Old
Kinderhook', from the birthplace of a nineteenth-century
American president who used the initials as a campaign
slogan. It's obvious that the ring itself represents the letter 'O'
in the 'OK' signal. The 'OK' meaning is common to all
English-speaking countries and its meaning is fast spreading
everywhere due to American television and movies, but it has
other origins and meanings in certain places. For example, in
France and Belgium it also means 'zero' or 'nothing'. In a Paris
restaurant one evening, the waiter showed us to our table and
asked, 'Is the table OK?' We flashed him the OK signal and he
responded, 'Well, if you don't like it here we'll find you
another table...' He had interpreted the OK signal as meaning
'zero' or 'worthless' - in other words, he thought we had com-
municated that we didn't like the table.
Use
 the 'OK' gesture to tell a French person their cooking
is wonderful and they'll probably throw you out.
In Japan it can mean 'money'; if you're doing business in
Japan and you make this sign for 'OK' a Japanese may think
you're asking them for a bribe. In some Mediterranean coun-
tries it's an orifice signal, often used to infer that a man is
homosexual. Show a Greek man the OK signal and he may
think you're inferring you or he is gay, while a Turk might
think you're calling him an 'arsehole'. It's rare in Arab coun-
tries where it is used as either a threat signal or as an obscenity.
119

--- Page 114 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_114_00.jpeg]

Never hitch-hike in Greece.
As we have already demonstrated, when Europeans count from
one to five, they use the
 Thumb-Up
 to mean 'one', the index
finger becomes 'two', whereas most English-speaking people
count 'one' on the index finger and 'two' on the middle finger. In
this case the
 Thumb-Up
 will represent the number 'five'.
This can mean 'Good', 'One',
'Up yours' or 'Sit on this'
depending where you live
20
The Definitive Book of Body Language
In the 1950s, before he became President, Richard Nixon
visited Latin America on a goodwill tour to try to patch up
strained relations with the locals. As he stepped out of his
plane he showed the waiting crowds the American 'OK' signal
and was stunned as they began booing and hissing at him
Being unaware of local body language customs, Nixon's OK
signal had been read as 'You're all a bunch of arseholes.'
If you travel internationally, the safest rule is to always ask
the locals to show you their insult signals to avoid any possible
embarrassing circumstances.
2.The Thumb-Up
In places that have strong British influence, such as Australia,
the USA, South Africa, Singapore and New Zealand, the
Thumb-Up
 gesture has three meanings: it's commonly used by
hitch-hikers who are thumbing a lift; it is an OK signal; and
when the thumb is jerked sharply upwards it becomes an
insult, meaning 'up yours' or 'sit on this'. In some countries,
such as Greece, the thumb is thrust forward and its main
meaning is 'get stuffed'!

--- Page 115 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_115_00.jpeg]

This can mean 'two' to
an American, 'Victory'
to a German and 'Up
yours' in Britain
Its origin can be traced back centuries to the English archers
who used these two fingers to fire their arrows. It was consid-
ered the ultimate degradation for a skilled archer to be
captured and, rather than be executed, have his two shooting
fingers removed. The two-fingered V sign quickly became used
as a goading signal in battle by the British to show their
enemies 'I've still got my shooting fingers.'
In parts of Europe, however, the palm-facing-in version still
means 'victory' so an Englishman who uses it to tell a German
'up yours' could leave the German thinking he'd won a prize.
This signal now also means the number two in some parts of
Europe, and if the insulted European was a bartender, his
121
Cultural Differences
Being the most powerful digit on the hand it is used as a sign of
power and can be seen protruding from pockets, waistcoats and
on lapels. The thumb is also used, in combination with other
gestures, as a power and superiority signal or in situations where
people try to get us 'under their thumb'. The thumb is referred
to in this expression because of its physical power.
3.TheV-Sign
This sign is common in Australia, New Zealand and Great
Britain and carries an 'up yours' interpretation. Winston
Churchill popularised the 'V for victory' sign during the
Second World War, but his two-fingered version was done with
the palm facing out, whereas the palm faces towards the
speaker for the obscene insult version.

--- Page 116 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
response could be to give an Englishman, American or Aus-
tralian two mugs of beer.
To Touch or Not to Touch?
Whether or not someone will be offended by being touched
during conversation depends on their culture. For example, the
French and Italians love to continually touch as they talk,
while the British prefer not to touch at any time unless it's on
a sports field in front of a large audience. Intimate embracing
by British, Australian and New Zealand sportsmen is copied
from South American and Continental sportsmen who
embrace and kiss each other after a goal is scored and continue
this intimate behaviour in the dressing rooms. The moment
the Aussies, Brits and Kiwis leave the field, it reverts to the
'hands off - or else' policy.
British men will only touch each other on a sports
field when someone scores a point or a goal and then
it's a full embrace, kiss and the odd grope. But try it
on in the pub and see what happens.
Dr Ken Cooper also studied touch frequencies in a number of
countries and recorded the following results for touches per
hour - Puerto Rico 180, Paris 110, Florida 2, London 0.
From our research and personal experience, here's a ready
reckoner of places where it's acceptable to touch or not:
22
Don't touch 
Do Touch
Germany 
India
Japan 
Turkey
England 
France
USA & Canada 
Italy
Australia 
Greece
New Zealand 
Spain

--- Page 117 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_117_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_117_01.jpeg]

Cultural Differences
Estonia
Portugal
Northern Europe
Scandinavia
Middle East
Parts of Asia
Russia
How to Offend Other Cultures
When it comes to inadvertently offending other cultures,
Americans usually take first prize. As mentioned, most Amer-
icans don't have a passport and believe the rest of the world
thinks like them and wants to be like them. Here's a picture of
George W Bush using the signature gesture of the Texas Long-
horn football team, of which he is a supporter. The index
finger and little finger represent the horns of the bull and this
football gesture is recognised by most Americans.
Showing this American football gesture
is a jailable offence in Italy
In Italy this gesture is known as the 'Cuckold' and is used to tell
a man that other men are screwing his wife. In 1985, five Amer-
icans were arrested in Rome for jubilantly dancing and using this
gesture outside the Vatican following the news of a major Long-
horns win in the USA. Apparently the Pope was unimpressed.
23

--- Page 118 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Summary
People do business with people who make them feel comfort-
able and it comes down to sincerity and good manners. When
entering a foreign country, concentrate on reducing the broad-
ness of your body language until you have the opportunity to
observe the locals. A simple way to learn and understand cul-
tural body language differences is to record several foreign
films and replay them with the sound off, but don't read the
subtitles. Try to work out what is happening then watch again
and read the subtitles to check your accuracy.
If you're not sure how to be polite in someone else's culture,
ask the locals to show you how things are done.
Cultural misinterpretation of gestures can produce embarrass-
ing results and a person's background should always be
considered before jumping to conclusions about the meaning
of his or her body language and gestures.
If you regularly travel internationally, we recommend Roger
Axtell's
 Gestures: Do's and Taboos of Body Language Around
the World
 (John Wiley & Sons). Axtell identified over 70,000
different physical signs and customs globally and shows you
how to do business in most cultures.
124

--- Page 119 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_119_00.jpeg]

Chapter 6
HAND AND THUMB
GESTURES
Napoleon in his Study by Jacques-Louis David, 1812,
showing the French leader in his famous pose - did he really
have a peptic ulcer or was he just having a good time?
A human hand has 27 small bones, including eight pebble-
shaped bones in the wrist, laced together by a network of
ligaments, dozens of tiny muscles to move the joints. Scientists
have noted that there are more nerve connections between the
hands and the brain than between any other parts of the body,
and so the gestures and positions we take with our hands give
Powerful insights into our emotional state. Because our hands
are usually held in front of our body, these signals are easy to
see and most of us have several trademark hand positions we
continually use. For example, mention the name 'Napoleon'
125

--- Page 120 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
and everyone will describe a man with his hand tucked into his
waistcoat with his thumb pointing upwards and will probably
volunteer a theory or tell rude jokes about why he did it. These
include: he had a stomach ulcer; he was winding his watch; he
had a skin disease; that in his era it was impolite to put your
hands in your pockets; he had breast cancer; he had a
deformed hand; he kept a perfumed sachet in his vest that he'd
sniff occasionally; he was playing with himself; and that
painters don't like to paint hands. The real story is that in
1738, well before Napoleon's birth, François Nivelon pub-
lished
 A Book Of Genteel Behaviour
 describing this posture
'
...the hand-held-in was a common stance for men of breed-
ing and manly boldness, tempered with modesty.'
 When
Napoleon saw the painting he said to the artist, 'You have
understood me, my dear David.' So it was a gesture to convey
status.
The history books show that Napoleon did not have this
gesture in his regular repertoire — in fact, he didn't even sit for
the famous painting that featured it - the artist painted him
from memory and added the gesture. But the notoriety of this
hand gesture highlights how the artist, Jacques-Louis David,
understood the authority that the position of the hand and
thumb would project.
Napoleon was 5'4" (1.64m) tall but those who see
the painting perceive him as over 6' (1.85m) tall.
How the Hands Talk
For thousands of years, the level of status people held in a
society would determine the priority order in which they could
hold the floor when speaking. The more power or authority
you had, the more others would be compelled to stay silent
while you spoke. For example, Roman history shows that a
low-status person could be executed for interrupting Julius
126

--- Page 121 ---

Tie an Italian's hands behind his
back and he'll be speechless.
Caesar. Today, most people live in societies where freedom of
speech flourishes and usually anyone who wants to put
forward an opinion can do so. In Britain, Australia and
the USA it's even permissible to interrupt the President or
prime Minister with your opinion or to give a condescending
slow handclap, as happened to Prime Minister Tony Blair
in 2003 during a television discussion on the Iraqi crisis. In
many countries, the hands have taken on the role of 'punctua-
tion marks' to regulate turn-taking in conversation. The
Hands Raised
 gesture has been borrowed from the Italians
and French, who are the biggest users of 'hand talking', but
it is still rarely seen in England, where waving your
hands about when you speak is seen as inappropriate or
poor style.
In Italy, the order of talking is simple - the person with his
hands raised has the floor and does the talking. The listener
will have his hands down or behind his back. So the trick is to
try to get your hands in the air if you want to get a word in and
this can be done either by looking away and then raising them
or by touching the other person's arm to suppress their hand
as you raise yours. Many people assume that when Italians
talk they are being friendly or intimate because they continu-
ally touch each other, but in fact each is attempting to restrict
the other's hands and take the floor.
In this chapter we'll evaluate some of the most common
hand and thumb gestures in widespread use.
Hand and Thumb Gestures
On the One Hand...
Watching how a person summarises a discussion giving both
Points of view can reveal whether they have a bias one way or
another. They usually hold one hand palm up and articulate
127

--- Page 122 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
each point and then give the opposing points on the
other hand. Right-handed people reserve their favoured point
of view for their right hand and left-handers favour their
left.
On the Other Hand, Gestures Improve Recall
Using hand gestures grabs attention, increases the impact of
communication and helps individuals retain more of the infor-
mation they are hearing. At the University of Manchester in
England, Geoffrey Beattie and Nina McLoughlin conducted a
study where volunteers listened to stories featuring cartoon
characters such as Roger Rabbit, Tweetie Pie and Sylvester the
Cat. For some listeners, a narrator added hand gestures such
as moving the hands up and down quickly to show running, a
waving movement to demonstrate a hair dryer and arms wide
apart to show a fat opera singer. When the listeners were
tested ten minutes later, those who had seen the hand gestures
had up to a third higher response when recalling the details of
the stories, demonstrating the dramatic effect hand gestures
have on our recall ability.
In this chapter, we'll examine 15 of the most common hand
gestures you're likely to see every day and we'll discuss what to
do about them.
Rubbing the Palms Together
Recently a friend visited us at home to discuss our forthcom-
ing skiing holiday. In the course of the conversation she sat
back in her chair, smiled broadly, rubbed her palms together
rapidly and exclaimed, 'I can hardly wait!' With her
 Raised-
Palms-Rub
 she had told us non-verbally that she expected the
trip to be a big success.
28

--- Page 123 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_123_00.jpeg]

Hand and Thumb Gestures
Showing positive
expectancy
Rubbing the palms together is a way in which people commu-
nicate positive expectation. The dice thrower rubs the dice
between his palms as a sign of his positive expectancy of
winning, the master of ceremonies rubs his palms together
and says to his audience, 'We have been looking forward to
hearing our next speaker,' and the excited salesperson struts
into the sales manager's office, rubs his palms together and
says excitedly, 'We've just received a big order!' However, the
waiter who comes to your table at the end of the evening
rubbing his palms together and asking, 'Anything else, sir?' is
non-verbally telling you that he has expectancy of a good tip.
The speed at which a person rubs their palms together
signals who he thinks will receive the positive benefits. Say, for
example, you want to buy a home and you visit an estate
agent. After describing the property you want, the agent rubs
his palms together quickly and says, 'I've got just the right
house for you!' In this way the agent has signalled that he
expects the results to be to
 your
 benefit. But how would you
reel if he rubbed his palms together very
 slowly
 as he told you
that he had the ideal property? He'd seem sneaky or devious
and you'd get the feeling that he expected the results to benefit
him, not you.
The
 speed of the hand rub signals who
the gesturer thinks will get the benefit
129

--- Page 124 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_124_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_124_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Salespeople are taught to use the palm rub gesture when
describing products or services to prospective buyers, and to
use a fast hand action to avoid putting buyers on the defensive
When a buyer quickly rubs his palms together and says, 'Let's
see what you have to offer!' it signals that he's expecting to see
something good and might buy.
'Have I got a
deal for you!'
Always remember context: a person who rubs his palms
together briskly while standing at a bus terminal on a cold day
may not necessarily be doing it because he's expecting a bus.
He does it because his hands are cold.
Thumb and Finger Rub
Rubbing the thumb against the index finger or fingertips is
commonly used as a money expectancy gesture. Its symbolism
is that of rubbing a coin between the thumb and fingertips. It
is often used by the street vendor who says, 'I can save you
40%,' or by the person who says to his friend, 'Can you lend
me fifty pounds?'
'We can make
money out of this!'
130

--- Page 125 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_125_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_125_01.jpeg]

Hand and Thumb Gestures
This gesture should be avoided at all times by any professional
person who deals with clients because it carries negative asso-
ciations about money.
Hands Clenched Together
At first, this gesture can seem to signal confidence as some
people who use it often also smile. On one occasion, we
observed a negotiator describing the deal he had just lost. As
he went further and further into his story, he had not only
taken the
 Hands Clenched
 position, his fingers were beginning
to turn white and looked as if they were welding together. The
Hands Clenched gesture shows a restrained, anxious or nega-
tive attitude. It's also a favourite of Queen Elizabeth when she
is on royal visits and public appearances and it is usually posi-
tioned on her lap.
Hands clenched in
raised position reveals
frustration, even when
smiling
Research into the Hands Clenched position by negotiation
experts Nierenberg and Calero showed that it was also a frus-
tration gesture when used during a negotiation, signalling that
the person was holding back a negative or anxious attitude. It
was a position assumed by a person who felt they were either
hot convincing the other person or thought they were losing
the negotiation.
The Hands Clenched gesture has three main positions:
hands clenched in front of the face; hands clenched resting on
he desk or on the lap; and, when standing, hands clenched in
front of the crotch.
131

--- Page 126 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_126_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_126_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Hands clenched in
centre position
Hands clenched in
lower position
We discovered a correlation between the height at which the
hands are held and the degree of the person's frustration: that
is, a person would be more difficult to deal with when the
hands are held high, as in a centre position, than they would
be in a lower position (see illustrations). As with all negative
gestures, you need to take action to unlock the person's
fingers, by offering them a drink or asking them to hold some-
thing, or their negative attitude will remain in the same way it
does with any arm-crossing position.
The Steeple
So far, we've emphasised that gestures come in clusters, like
words in a sentence, and that they must be interpreted in the
context in which you observe them. Steepling can be an excep-
tion to these rules, as it often occurs in isolation. The fingers
of one hand lightly press against those of the other hand to
132

--- Page 127 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_127_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_127_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_127_02.jpeg]

Hand and Thumb Gestures
form a church steeple and will sometimes rock back and forth
like a spider doing push-ups on a mirror.
We found that the
 Steeple
 was frequently used in superior-
subordinate interaction and that it indicates a confident or
self-assured attitude. Superiors often use this gesture position
when they give instructions or advice to subordinates and it is
particularly common among accountants, lawyers and man-
agers. People who are confident, superior types often use this
gesture and, by doing so, signal their confident attitude.
Confident he has
the right answers
Those who use this gesture sometimes convert the Steeple into
a praying gesture in an attempt to appear God-like. As a
general rule, the Steeple should be avoided when you want to
be persuasive or win the other person's confidence, as it can
sometimes be read as smugness or arrogance.
President Chirac and Gerry Adams sometimes appear God-like
133

--- Page 128 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_128_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
If you want to look as if you are confident and have all the
right answers, the Steeple position will do it for you.
Using Steepling to Win at Chess
Picture this scene - you're playing chess and it's your turn to
move. You move your hand over the chessboard and rest your
finger on a chess piece, indicating you intend to move that
piece. You then notice your opponent sit back and make the
Steeple gesture. Your opponent has just told you, non-verbally,
that he feels confident about your move so your best strategy
is not to make it. You next touch another chess piece and see
your opponent assume the Hands Clenched gesture or Arms
Crossed position, signalling that he doesn't like your potential
move — so you should make it.
The Steeple has two main versions: the
 Raised Steeple,
 the
position often assumed when the Steepler is giving his opin-
ions or ideas or is doing the talking; and the
 Lowered Steeple,
which is normally used when the Steepler is listening rather
than speaking.
The Lowered Steeple
Women tend to use the Lowered Steeple position more often
than the Raised Steeple. When the Raised Steeple is taken with
the head tilted back, the person takes on an air of smugness or
arrogance.
Although the Steeple gesture is a positive signal, it can be
used in either positive or negative circumstances and may
be misinterpreted. For example, let's say you are present-
ing an idea to someone and have seen them using several
134

--- Page 129 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_129_00.jpeg]

Hand and Thumb Gestures
positive gestures during the presentation, such as open palms,
leaning forward, head up, nodding and so on. Let's say that
towards the end of your presentation the other person begins
to
 Steeple.
If the Steeple follows a series of other positive gestures
and appears when you show the other person the solution
to his problem, it's likely you've been given the go-ahead
to 'ask for the order'. On the other hand, if the Steeple
gesture follows a series of negative gestures such as arm
folding, leg crossing, looking away and hand-to-face gestures,
he may be confident that he
 won't
 say 'yes' or that he can
get rid of you. In both these cases the Steeple registers confi-
dence, but one has positive results and the other negative
consequences. The gestures preceding the Steeple are the
key to the outcome.
Summary
Your hands are always in front of you, revealing your emotions
and attitudes. Many body language gestures can be difficult to
learn but hand gestures can be practised and rehearsed to a
point where you can have fairly good control over where your
hands are and what they are doing. When you learn to read
hand gestures you'll look more confident, feel more successful
and win more chess games.
The Face Platter -
Presenting her face
for a man to admire
The Face Platter
This is not a negative gesture - it's a posi-
tive one used in courtship. It's used mainly
by women and by gay men who want to
attract a man's attention. A woman will
place one hand on top of the other and
present her face to a man as if it was on a
platter for him to admire.
135

--- Page 130 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_130_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_130_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
If you are going to use flattery - sincere or not - this gesture
gives the green light for it.
Holding Hands Behind the Back
The Duke of Edinburgh and several other male members
of the British Royal Family are noted for their habit of walk-
ing with head up, chin out and one hand holding the other
hand behind the back. This gesture is common among
leaders and royalty and is used by the policemen patrolling
the beat, the headmaster walking around the school play-
ground, senior military personnel and anyone in a position of
authority.
Back and front views of the
superiority-confidence gesture
The emotions attached to this gesture are superiority, confi-
dence and power. The person exposes their vulnerable
stomach, heart, crotch and throat in a subconscious act of
fearlessness. Our experience shows that, if you take this posi-
tion when you are in a high-stress situation, such as being
interviewed by newspaper reporters or waiting outside a
dentist's surgery, you'll begin to feel confident and even
authoritative, as a result of cause and effect.
Our work with law enforcement officers showed that offi-
136

--- Page 131 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_131_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_131_01.jpeg]

Hand and Thumb Gestures
The higher up one hand grips the opposite arm, the more frus-
trated or angry the person is likely to be. In the illustration
below the person is showing a greater attempt at self-control
than in the previous picture, because the hand is gripping the
upper arm, not just the wrist. This gesture shows the origin of
the expression, 'Get a good grip on yourself.'
The Upper Arm Grip
cers who don't wear firearms use this position regularly and
often rock back and forth on the balls of the feet when stand-
ing to gain additional height. Police officers who wear firearms
seldom use this gesture, preferring to let their arms hang by
their side or to have their thumbs tucked into the belt. The
firearm gives the officer sufficient power that
 Palm-in-Palm
behind the back is not a necessary display of authority.
The
 Hand-Gripping-Wrist
 gesture communicates a different
emotion to Palm-in-Palm behind the back. It's a signal of frus-
tration and an attempt at self-control. One hand grips the
other wrist or arm tightly behind the back, as if in an attempt
by one arm to prevent the other from striking out.
The Hand-Gripping-Wrist
gesture
137

--- Page 132 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_132_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Wrist-and-arm-gripping behind the back can often be
observed outside a courtroom when warring parties are face to
face, in salespeople standing in a customer's reception area
and in patients waiting for a doctor. It's an attempt to disguise
nervousness or self-restraint and, if you catch yourself doing
it, change to the Palm-in-Palm behind the back and you will
begin to feel more confident and in control.
Thumb Displays
As mentioned earlier, thumbs denote superiority. In palmistry,
the thumbs represent strength of character and the ego, and
body language signals involving the thumbs also show self-
important attitudes. Thumbs are used to display dominance,
assertiveness or sometimes aggressive attitudes; thumb ges-
tures are secondary gestures and are usually part of a cluster.
Thumb displays are positive signals, often used in the typical
pose of the 'cool' individual who uses them to show superior-
ity. A man will use
 Protruding Thumbs
 around women to
whom he is attracted and people who wear high-status or pres-
tige clothing also display their thumbs. You will rarely see a
low-status individual, such as a vagrant, doing it.
The Waistcoat Thruster
Thumb displayers also often rock on the balls of their feet to
give the impression of extra height.
38

--- Page 133 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_133_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_133_01.jpeg]

Hand and Thumb Gestures
fhumbs-Protruding-from-Coat-Pocket
This gesture is common to
men and women who feel
they are in a superior posi-
tion to others. It's one of
Prince 
Charles' 
regular
gestures and reveals the in-
control attitude he feels at
the time. In a work envi-
ronment, the boss will
walk around the office in
the position and, when the
boss is away, the person
who is next in charge will
walk around using it. But
none of the subordinates
would dare to use it in
front of the boss.
Thumb 
displays 
can
become obvious when a
person gives a contradic-
tory verbal message. Take, for example, the lawyer who turns
to the jury and in a soft, low voice says, 'In my humble
opinion, ladies and gentlemen ...' while displaying his thumbs
and tilting back his head to 'look down his nose' at them.
Prince Charles using his Thumb-
Protruding-from-Coat-Pocket gesture
A lawyer pretending
to be humble
139

--- Page 134 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_134_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
This can make the jury feel that the lawyer is being insincere
or pompous. If a lawyer wanted to appear humble, he should
approach the jury with his coat open, with open palms and
stoop forward to appear smaller.
'You seem like an intelligent, honest man,' the
lawyer said smugly. 'I'd return the compliment, sir,'
said the witness. 'But I'm under oath.'
Thumbs sometimes protrude from the back pockets (see
below) as if the person is trying to hide their dominant atti-
tude. Women were rarely seen using Thumb Displays until the
1960s when they began to wear trousers and take on more
authoritative roles in society.
Thumb displays revealing
confident, authoritative attitudes
Arms-Folded-with-Thumbs-Pointing-Upwards
 
is 
another
common thumb cluster. This is a double signal, showing a
defensive or negative attitude (folded arms), plus a superior
attitude revealed by the thumbs. The person using this cluster
usually gestures with his thumbs when he talks, and rocks on
the balls of his feet when standing.
40

--- Page 135 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_135_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_135_01.jpeg]

Hand and Thumb Gestures
Closing himself off
but still feeling superior
The thumb can also be used as a signal of ridicule or disre-
spect when it is used to point at another person. For example,
the husband who leans across to his friend, points towards his
wife with his thumb and says 'She always nags', is inviting an
argument with her. In this case, the shaking thumb is used as
a pointer to ridicule her. Consequently, thumb-pointing is irri-
tating to most women, particularly when a man does it. The
Thumb Shaking gesture is not common among women,
although they sometimes use the gesture to point at people
they don't like.
'She always nags me!'
Summary
Ihe thumbs have been used as a sign of power and authority
for thousands of years. In Roman times, the thumb held up or
down meant life or death to a gladiator. Even without any
training, others intuitively decode thumb signals and seem to
understand their meaning. You are now in a position not only
to decode thumb signs, but to train yourself to use them.
141

--- Page 136 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_136_00.jpeg]

Chapter 7
EVALUATION AND
DECEIT SIGNALS
Decoding Hand-to-Face Gestures
Bill Clinton in front of the Grand Jury -
what do you think he's thinking?
If you told the absolute truth to everyone you interacted with,
what would be the result? If you said the
 exact words
 going
through your mind as you thought them, what consequences
would it bring? For example:
To your boss:
 'Good morning, boss — you talentless slob.'
Man to a female customer:
 'Thanks for your business,
Susan, and may I say what wonderful firm breasts you have.'
Woman to a male neighbour:
 'Thanks for helping me with
my groceries. You've got a nice tight butt but who the hell cuts
your hair?'
To your mother-in-law:
 'It's nice to see you again — you,
interfering, negative old bat.'
When a woman asks, 'Does this dress make me look fat?' what
is your answer? If you are a man, and you know what's good
for you, you'd say she looked good. But you might have been
thinking, 'The dress doesn't make you look fat - it's all the
142

--- Page 137 ---

Evaluation and Deceit Signals
cake and ice cream you eat that makes you look fat.'
if you told everyone the complete truth all the time, you'd
not only end up lonely, you might even finish up in hospital or
prison. Lying is the oil that greases our interactions with others
and lets us maintain friendly social relationships. These are
called
 White Lies
 because their goal is to make others feel com-
fortable instead of telling them the cold, hard truth. Research
shows that social liars are more popular than those who con-
tinually tell the truth, even though we know the social liar is
lying to us.
 Malicious Lies,
 however, are where one person
deliberately sets out to deceive another for personal benefit.
Lying Research
The least dependable signs of lying are the ones over which a
person has the most control, such as words, because a person
can rehearse their lies. The most reliable clues to lying are the
gestures a person makes automatically, because they have little
or no control over them. These responses are most likely to
happen during lies because they are emotionally the most
important things to the liar.
Robert Feldman at the University of Massachusetts in
Amherst studied 121 couples as they had a conversation with
a third person. One third of the participants were told to
appear likeable, while another third were instructed to seem
competent, and the rest were asked just to be themselves. All
Participants were then asked to watch the video of themselves
and identify any lies they had told during the conversation no
matter how big or small. Some lies were white lies, such as
saying they liked someone when they really didn't, while other
lies were more extreme, such as falsely claiming to be the star
of a rock band. Overall, Feldman found that 62% of his par-
ticipants told an average of two to three lies every ten minutes.
James Patterson, author of
 The Day America told The Truth,
interviewed over 2000 Americans and found that 91% lied reg-
ularly both at home and at work.
143

--- Page 138 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_138_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
'It is always the best policy to speak the truth,
unless of course you are an exceptionally good liar.'
J.K. JEROME
So how can you tell when someone is lying, stalling or simply
thinking it over? Recognition of deceit, procrastination,
boredom and evaluation gestures can be some of the most
important observation skills you can learn. In this chapter,
you'll learn the body language signals that give people away.
The first part of the chapter will deal with lying and deceit.
The Three Wise Monkeys
These monkeys symbolise those who hear no evil, see no evil
and speak no evil. Their simple hand-to-face gestures form the
basis of the human deceit gestures. In simple terms, when we
see, speak and hear lies or deceit, we are likely to attempt to
cover our mouth, eyes or ears with our hands.
144
Hear no evil, see no evil, speak no evil
People who hear bad news or witness a horrific accident will
often cover their entire face with their hands to symbolically
stop themselves from seeing or hearing the awful news. This
was the gesture that was most observed worldwide when

--- Page 139 ---

Evaluation and Deceit Signals
people heard about the planes flying into the Twin Towers on
11 September 2001.
As we've already discussed, children often use hand-to-face
gestures openly when they lie. If a child tells a lie, he will often
cover his mouth with one or both hands in an attempt to stop
the deceitful words from coming out. If he doesn't want to
listen to a reprimanding parent, he simply covers his ears with
his hands to block out the noise. When he sees something he
doesn't want to look at, he covers his eyes with his hands or
arms. As he becomes older, these hand-to-face gestures
become quicker and less obvious, but they still occur when he
is lying, covering up or witnessing deceit.
These gestures are also associated with doubt, uncertainty or
exaggeration. Desmond Morris conducted research in which
nurses were instructed to lie to their patients about their health
in a role-play situation. The nurses who lied showed a greater
frequency of hand-to-face gestures than those who told the
truth to the patients. Men and women also both increase their
number of gulps of saliva when lying, but this is usually notice-
able only with men, as they have an enlarged Adam's apple.
7
 did not have sexual relations with that woman,'
said the politician as he gulped and rubbed his nose.
As mentioned at the beginning of this book, we'll be analysing
gestures in isolation and discussing them individually but this
is not how they usually occur. They are part of a larger gesture
cluster and should be studied in the same way as words in a
sentence, that is, how each word is relevant to other words and
the overall context in which they are used. When someone uses
a hand-to-face gesture, it doesn't always mean that he or she is
lying. It does indicate, however, that the person could be
holding back information and further observation of other
gesture clusters can confirm or deny your suspicions. It's
important that you avoid interpreting a single hand-to-face
gesture in isolation.
145

--- Page 140 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
While there is no single guaranteed movement, facial expres-
sion or twitch that confirms someone is telling a lie, there are
several clusters you can learn to recognise which will dramati-
cally increase your chances of spotting a lie.
How the Face Reveals the Truth
The face is used more than any other part of the body to cover
up lies. We use smiles, nods and winks in an attempt to cover
up, but unfortunately for us, our body signals will tell the truth
and there is a lack of congruence between our body gestures
and facial signals. Our attitudes and emotions are continually
revealed on our faces and we are completely unaware of it
most of the time.
Fleeting incongruencies in the face
reveal conflicts in the emotions.
When we're going to try to conceal a lie, or a certain thought
flashes into our mind, it can be shown for a split second on our
face. We usually interpret someone's quick nose touch as an
itch, or that when they rest their hand on their face they are
deeply interested in us, without ever suspecting that we're
boring them to death. For example, we filmed a man dis-
cussing how well he got on with his mother-in-law. Each time
he mentioned her name the left side of his face raised in a
momentary sneer that lasted only a split second but told us
volumes about how he really felt.
Women Lie the Best and That's the Truth
In
 Why Men Lie & Women Cry
 (Pease) we showed how
women are better at reading emotions, and therefore better at
manipulating others with an appropriate lie. This trait is seen
146

--- Page 141 ---

Evaluation and Deceit Signals
in baby girls who cry in sympathy with other babies and can
then cause other babies to cry by simply bursting into tears at
will. Sanjida O'Connell PhD, author of
 Mindreading,
 con-
ducted a five-month study into how we lie and also concluded
that women are far better liars than men. She found that
women tell more complicated lies than men, whereas men tell
simple lies such as 'I missed the bus' or 'My mobile phone
battery was flat — that's why I couldn't call you.' She also
found that attractive people are more believed than unattrac-
tive ones, explaining why leaders such as John F Kennedy and
Bill Clinton were able to get away with as much as they did.
147
Why It's Hard to Lie
As we said in Chapter 3, most people believe that when
someone is lying they smile more than usual, but research
shows the opposite is true — they smile less. The difficulty with
lying is that the subconscious mind acts automatically and
independently of our verbal lie, so our body language gives us
away. This is why people who rarely tell lies are easily caught,
regardless of how convincing they may sound. The moment
they begin to lie, their body sends out contradictory signals,
and these give us a feeling that they're not telling the truth.
During the lie, the subconscious mind sends out nervous
energy which appears as a gesture that can contradict what
was said. Professional liars, such as politicians, lawyers, actors
and television announcers, have refined their body gestures to
the point where it is difficult to 'see' the lie, and people fall for
it, hook, line and sinker.
They do it in one of two ways. First, they practise what 'feel'
like the right gestures when they tell the lie, but this only works
when they have practised telling a lot of lies over long periods
of time. Second, they can reduce their gesturing so that they
don't use any positive or negative gestures while lying, but
that's also hard to do.

--- Page 142 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_142_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
With practice, liars can become
convincing, just like actors.
Try this simple test - tell a deliberate lie to someone face-to-
face and make a conscious effort to suppress all body gestures
Even when your major body gestures are consciously sup-
pressed, numerous small micro-gestures will still be
transmitted. These include facial muscular twitching, dilation
and contraction of pupils, sweating, flushed cheeks, eye-blink-
ing rate increasing from 10 blinks per minute to as many as 50
blinks per minute and many other micro-signals that indicate
deceit. Research using slow-motion cameras shows that these
micro-gestures can occur within a split second and it's only
people such as professional interviewers, salespeople and the
very perceptive who can read them.
It's obvious then, that to be able to lie successfully, you need
to have your body hidden or out of sight. Interrogation
involves placing the person on a chair in the open or placing
him under lights with his body in full view of the interroga-
tors; his lies are much easier to see under those circumstances.
Lying is easier if you're sitting behind a desk where your body
is partially hidden, peering over a fence or from behind a
closed door. The best way to lie is over the telephone or in an
email.
Eight of the Most Common
Lying Gestures
1.The Mouth Cover
The hand covers the mouth as the
brain subconsciously instructs it to
try to suppress the deceitful words
that are being said. Sometimes this
The Mouth Cover
48

--- Page 143 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_143_00.jpeg]

Evaluation and Deceit Signals
gesture might only be several fingers over the mouth or even a
closed fist, but its meaning remains the same.
Some people try to disguise the
 Mouth Cover
 gesture by
giving a fake cough. When actors play gangsters or criminals,
they often use this gesture when discussing criminal activities
with other gangsters or when being interrogated by the police,
so that the audience knows they're being secretive or dishon-
est.
If the person who is speaking uses this gesture, it indicates
that they could be lying. If they cover their mouth while
 you
are speaking, it can show they might feel
 you
 are hiding some-
thing. One of the most unsettling sights a conference speaker
can see is his audience using this gesture while he's speaking.
A speaker should stop and ask, 'Would someone like to ask a
question?' or 'I can see some people disagree. Let's take ques-
tions.' This allows the audience's objections to be brought into
the open, giving the speaker the opportunity to qualify state-
ments and answer questions, just as he would do if they had
their arms crossed.
The Mouth Cover may appear as innocuous as the
 'Shhh'
gesture where one finger is placed vertically over the lips; this
gesture would likely have been used by the person's mother or
father when he was a child. As an adult, the person uses it in
an attempt to tell themselves not to say something they're
feeling. The point is that it alerts you to something that is
being withheld.
If your parents or minders
used this gesture when you
were a child, there's a good
chance it's now in your
adult repertoire
149

--- Page 144 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_144_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_144_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
The Nose Touch
2.The Nose Touch
Sometimes the
 Nose Touch
 can be
several quick rubs below the nose or it
may be one quick, almost imperceptible
nose touch. Women perform this gesture
with smaller strokes than men, perhaps
to avoid smudging their make-up.
The important thing to remember is
that this type of action should be read
in clusters and in context; the person
could have hay fever or a cold.
Scientists at the Smell and Taste Treatment and Research
Foundation in Chicago found that when you lie, chemicals
known as catecholamines are released, causing tissue inside
the nose to swell. They used special imaging cameras that
show blood flow in the body to reveal that intentional lying
also causes an increase in blood pressure. This technology
indicates that the human nose actually expands with blood
during lying, and is known as the 'Pinocchio Effect'. Increased
blood pressure inflates the nose and causes the nerve endings
in the nose to tingle, resulting in a brisk rubbing action to the
nose with the hand to satisfy the 'itch'.
You can't see the swelling with the naked eye but this is what
appears to cause the Nose Touch gesture. The same phenom-
enon occurs when a person is upset, anxious or angry.
American 
neurologist
Alan Hirsch and psychia-
trist Charles Wolf did an
extensive analysis of Bill
Clinton's testimony to the
Grand Jury on his affair
with Monica Lewinsky and
found that, when he told the
truth, he rarely touched his
'I did not have sexual relations
with that woman!'
50

--- Page 145 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_145_00.jpeg]

Evaluation and Deceit Signals
nose. When he lied, however, he gave a split-second frown
before he answered and touched his nose once every four
minutes for a grand total of 26 nose touches. Conversely, Bill
Clinton did not touch his nose at all when he answered truth-
fully, they said.
Studies with Body Imaging cameras have revealed that a
man's penis also swells with blood when he tells a lie. Maybe
the Grand Jury should have pulled Bill's trousers down
instead.
Grand Jury prosecutor:
 'Mr Clinton - why did the chicken
cross the road?'
Bill Clinton:
 'What do you mean by chicken? Could you
define chicken please? And I did not cross the road with
 that
chicken.'
3. What About an itchy Nose?
The itch of a person's nose is normally satisfied by a deliber-
ate rubbing or scratching action, as opposed to the light
strokes of the Nose Touch gesture. As with the Mouth Cover,
the Nose Touch can be used both by the speaker to disguise his
own deceit and by the listener who doubts the speaker's words.
An itch is usually an isolated repetitive gesture and is incon-
gruent or out of context with the person's overall
conversation.
4.The Eye Rub
'See no evil,' said one of the wise
monkeys. When a child doesn't want to
look at something he'll cover his eyes
with one or both hands. When an adult
doesn't want to look at something dis-
tasteful, the
 Eye Rub
 is likely to occur.
The Eye Rub is the brain's attempt to
block out the deceit, doubt or distasteful
thing it sees, or to avoid having to look at the face of the
person who is being lied to. Men usually rub their eyes vigor-
151
'I just can't see it'

--- Page 146 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_146_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
ously and if the lie is a real whopper they will often look away.
Women are less likely to use the Eye Rub - instead, they will
use small, gentle touching motions just below the eye, because
they either have been conditioned as girls to avoid making
robust gestures, or to avoid smudging make-up. They also
avoid a listener's gaze by looking away.
'Lying through your teeth' is a commonly used phrase. It
refers to a gesture cluster of clenched teeth and a false smile,
combined with the Eye Rub. This gesture is used by movie actors
to portray insincerity and by 'polite' cultures such as the English,
who prefer not to tell you exactly what they're thinking.
5.The Ear Grab
Imagine you tell someone, 'It only costs
$900 and the person grabs their ear,
looks away to the side and says, 'It
sounds like a good deal to me.' This is
a symbolic attempt by the listener to
'hear no evil': trying to block the words
he is hearing by putting the hand
around or over the ear or tugging at the
earlobe. This is the adult version of the
 Hands-Over-Both-Ears
gesture used by the child who wants to block out his parent's
reprimands. Other variations of the
 Ear Grab
 include rubbing
the back of the ear, the
 Finger Drill —
 where the fingertip is
screwed back and forth inside the ear, pulling at the earlobe or
bending the entire ear forward to cover the ear hole.
The Ear Grab can also be a signal that the person has heard
enough or may want to speak. As with the Nose Touch, the
Ear Grab is used by a person who is experiencing anxiety.
Prince Charles often uses both the Ear Grab and the Nose
Touch when he enters a room full of people or walks past a
large crowd. His anxiety is revealed here and we have never
seen a photo or film footage of him using these gestures when
he is in the relative safety of his car.
In Italy, however, the Ear Grab is used to indicate that
someone is effeminate or gay.
'I don't want to hear it.'

--- Page 147 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_147_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_147_01.jpeg]

Evaluation and Deceit Signals
Showing uncertainty
6.The Neck Scratch
The index finger — usually of the
writing hand — scratches the side
of the neck below the earlobe. Our
observations of this gesture reveal
the person scratches an average of
five times. Rarely is the number of
scratches less than five and hardly
ever more than five. This gesture is
a signal of doubt or uncertainty and is characteristic of the
person who says, 'I'm not sure I agree.' It is very noticeable
when the verbal language contradicts it, for example, when the
person says something like, 'I can understand how you feel'
but the
 Neck Scratch
 indicates they don't.
7.The Collar Pull
Desmond Morris was one of the first
to discover that lies cause a tingling
sensation in the delicate facial and
neck tissues, and a rub or scratch was
required to satisfy it. This not only
accounts for why people who are
uncertain will scratch their neck, it
presents a good explanation as to why
some people use the
 Collar Pull
 when
they lie and suspect they have been caught out. Increased
blood pressure from the deceit causes sweat to form on the
neck when the deceiver feels that you suspect he's not telling
the truth.
It also occurs when a person is feeling angry or frustrated
and needs to pull the collar away from his neck in an attempt
to let the cool air circulate. When you see someone use this
gesture, ask, 'Could you repeat that, please?' or, 'Could you
clarify that point, please?' This can cause the would-be
deceiver to give the game away.
Getting hot under
the collar
153

--- Page 148 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_148_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_148_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
8. Fingers-in-the-Mouth
This is an unconscious attempt by the person to revert to the
security of the child sucking on his mother's breast and occurs
when a person feels under pressure. A young child substitutes
his thumb or a blanket for his mother's breast and, as an adult
he puts his fingers to his mouth and sucks on cigarettes, pipes'
pens and glasses, and chews gum.
Reassurance is needed here
Most Hand-to-Mouth gestures can be connected to lying or
deception but the
 Fingers-in-Mouth
 gesture is an outward
indication of an inner need for reassurance so giving the
person guarantees and assurances is a positive move.
Evaluation and Procrastination Gestures
A good speaker is said to be one who 'instinctively' knows
when his audience is interested in what he's saying and can
also tell when his listeners have had enough. A good salesper-
son senses when he is hitting his client's 'hot buttons' and
finding out where the buyer's interest lies. Every presenter
knows the empty feeling that results when he or she is giving a
presentation to someone who says very little and just sits there
154

--- Page 149 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_149_00.jpeg]

Evaluation and Deceit Signals
watching. Fortunately, there are a number of
 Hand-to-Cheek
an
d
 Hand-to-Chin
 gestures that can be used as a thermometer
to test how hot or cold the other person's attitude is, and to tell
the speaker how well he is doing.
Boredom
When the listener begins to use his hand to support his head,
it is a signal that boredom has set in and his supporting hand
is an attempt to hold his head up to stop himself from falling
asleep. The degree of the listener's boredom is related to the
extent to which his arm and hand are supporting his head. It
usually begins with the chin being supported by the thumb
and then by the fist as interest wanes. Extreme lack of interest
is shown when the head is fully supported by the hand (see
illustration), and the ultimate boredom signal occurs when the
head is fully supported by the hands and snoring sounds are
evident.
The hand supporting
the head to stop
from falling asleep
Drumming the fingers on the table and continual tapping of
the feet on the floor are often misinterpreted by professional
speakers as boredom signals, but in fact signal impatience. If
you are addressing a group of people and see these signals, a
strategic move must be made to get the finger drummer or foot
tapper involved in the conversation to avoid his negative effect
on the other listeners. Any audience that displays boredom
and impatience signals together is telling the speaker that it is
time for him to end.
155

--- Page 150 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_150_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_150_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
'Do you talk in your sleep?' he asked the speaker.
'No,'came the reply.'Then please don't talk in mine.'
The speed of the finger or foot tap is related to the extent of
the person's impatience — the faster the taps, the more impa-
tient the listener is becoming.
Evaluation Gestures
Evaluation is shown by a closed hand resting on the chin or
cheek, often with the index finger pointing upwards. When the
person begins to lose interest but still wants to appear inter-
ested for courtesy's sake, the position will alter so that the heel
of the palm supports the head as boredom sets in.
Interested evaluation —
the head supports itself and
the hand rests on the cheek
Middle managers often use this gesture to feign interest to the
company president who is giving a dull, boring speech. Unfor-
tunately for them, however, as soon as the hand begins to
support the head in any way, it gives the game away and the
president is likely to feel that some of the managers are being
insincere or using false flattery.
Having negative
thoughts
56

--- Page 151 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_151_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_151_01.jpeg]

Evaluation and Deceit Signals
He's heard enough or
is not impressed
Genuine interest is shown
when the hand lightly rests on
the cheek and is not used as a
head support. When the index
finger points vertically up the
cheek and the thumb supports
the chin, the listener is having
negative or critical thoughts
about the speaker or his
subject. Sometimes the index
finger may rub or pull at the
eye as the negative thoughts
continue.
This gesture is often mis-
taken as a signal of interest,
but the supporting thumb
under the chin tells the truth about the critical attitude.
Holding a gesture cluster affects a person's attitude so the
longer a person holds it, the longer their critical attitude will
remain. This gesture cluster
is a signal that immediate
action is required by the
speaker, either by involving
the listener in what he is
saying or by ending the
encounter. A simple move,
such as handing something
to the listener to alter his
Pose, can cause a change in
attitude.
Rodin's The Thinker showed a
thoughtful, evaluative attitude,
but the body posture and hand
supporting the head also reveal a
dejected person
157

--- Page 152 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
The Lying Interviewee
We interviewed a man who had arrived from abroad to apply
for a position with our company. Throughout the interview
he kept his arms and legs crossed, used critical evaluation
clusters, had very little palm use and he looked away fre-
quently. Something was obviously worrying him, but in
the early stages of the interview we didn't have sufficient
information for an accurate assessment of his negative
gestures. We asked questions about his previous employers in
his native country. His answers included a series of eye-
rubbing and nose-touching gestures and he continued to look
away. We eventually decided not to hire him, based on what
we had seen as opposed to what he had said. We were curious
about his deceit gestures and when we checked with his
overseas referees, we discovered that he had given false infor-
mation about his past. He assumed that a potential employer
in another country probably wouldn't bother to check over-
seas references and, had we not been aware of the body
language cues and signals, we could have made the mistake
of hiring him.
Chin Stroking
The next time you have the opportunity to present an idea to
a group of people, watch them carefully as you give your idea
and you may notice that most will bring one hand up to their
face and use an evaluation gesture. When you come to the end
of your presentation and ask the group to give opinions or sug-
gestions about your ideas, the evaluation gestures will usually
stop and a
 Chin Stroking
 gesture begins. This Chin Stroke is
the signal that the listener is going through the decision-
making process.
58

--- Page 153 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_153_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_153_01.jpeg]

Evaluation and Deceit Signals
Making a decision
Female version of Chin Stroking
When you've asked the listeners for their decision and they
start Chin Stroking, their next gestures will signal whether
their decision is negative or positive. Your best strategy is to
stay quiet and watch their next gestures, which will indicate
the decision reached. For example, if the Chin Stroke is fol-
lowed by crossed arms and legs and the person sits back in
their chair, it's a fair bet the answer will be 'no'. This gives you
an early opportunity to resell the benefits before the other
person verbalises 'no' and makes it harder to reach agreement.
If the Chin Stroke is followed by leaning forward with arms
open or picking up your proposal or sample, chances are you
have a 'yes' and can proceed as if you have agreement.
Stalling Clusters
Someone who wears glasses sometimes follows an evaluation
cluster by taking off their glasses and putting one arm of the
frame in the mouth instead of using the Chin Stroke when
making their decision. A cigarette smoker will take a puff of
smoke. When a person puts a pen or a finger in their mouth after
159

--- Page 154 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_154_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_154_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
you've asked for a decision, it's a signal that he is unsure and
reassurance is needed. The object in the mouth allows him to
stall and not feel any urgency in giving an immediate response.
Sometimes boredom, evaluation and decision-making ges-
tures come in combinations, each showing different elements
of the person's attitude.
The next illustration shows the evaluation gesture moved to
the chin, and the hand may also be stroking the chin. This
person is evaluating the proposition and drawing conclusions
simultaneously.
Evaluation/decision-making
cluster
When the listener begins to lose interest in the speaker, the
head begins to rest on the hand. The next picture shows eval-
uation with the head supported by the thumb as the listener
becomes uninterested.
Evaluation, decision,
boredom cluster
160

--- Page 155 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_155_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_155_01.jpeg]

Evaluation and Deceit Signals
Arnold Schwarzenegger drives home his
point while the TV host thinks it over
Head Rubbing and Slapping Gestures
When you say someone 'gives you a pain in the neck', you are
referring to the ancient reaction of the tiny erector pillae
muscles on the neck — often called
goosebumps — attempting to make
your non-existent fur pelt stand on
end to make yourself appear more
intimidating because you are feeling
threatened or angry. It's the same hair-
raising reaction an angry dog has
when it's confronted by another
potentially hostile dog. This reaction
causes the tingling feeling you experi-
ence on the back of your neck when
you feel frustrated or fearful. You'll
usually rub your hand over the area to
'Pain in the neck' gesture 
satisfy the sensation.
16

--- Page 156 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_156_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Let us assume, for example, that you asked someone to do a
small favour for you and that they had forgotten to do it
When you ask them for the result, they slap either their fore-
head or back of the neck, as if they were symbolically beating
themselves. Although slapping of the head is used to commu-
nicate forgetfulness, it's important to watch whether they slap
the forehead or neck. If they slap their forehead, they signal
that they are not intimidated by you mentioning their forget-
fulness. When they slap the back of the neck to satisfy the
raised erector pillae muscles, however, it tells you that you are
literally a 'pain-in-the-neck' for mentioning it. If the person
slaps their rear end however...
Gerard Nierenberg, of the Negotiation Institute in New
York, found that those who habitually rub the back of the
neck have a tendency to be negative or critical, whereas those
who habitually rub their foreheads to non-verbalise an error
tend to be more open and easy-going.
Punishing oneself by
slapping oneself
Acquiring the ability to interpret hand-to-face gestures accu-
rately in a given set of circumstances takes time and observation.
When a person uses any of the hand-to-face gestures discussed
in this chapter, it's reasonable to assume a negative thought has
entered his mind. The question is, however, what is the negative
thought? It could be doubt, deceit, uncertainty, exaggeration,
apprehension or outright lying. The real skill is the ability to
interpret which negative is the correct one. This can best be done
by an analysis of the gestures preceding the hand-to-face gesture
and interpreting it in context.
162

--- Page 157 ---

We have a colleague, Bob, who enjoys playing chess. We chal-
lenged him to a competition, which we secretly videotaped for
later analysis of his body language. The video revealed that
Bob often rubbed his ear or touched his nose during the game,
but only when he was unsure of his next move. We discovered
that when we signalled an intention to move a chess piece by
touching it, Bob's body language would signal what he
thought about the proposed move. When he felt he could beat
a move, and had probably already thought of a counter move,
he'd signal his confidence by Steepling; when he was uncertain
or unhappy he'd use the Mouth Cover, Ear Pull or Neck
Scratch. This happened with such predictability that when we
secretly explained Bob's cues to the other members of our
chess group, soon most could beat poor old Bob by anticipat-
ing his thoughts from his body language. Bob has not been
offered a copy of this book.
The Double Meaning
During a videotaped role-play interview, our interviewee sud-
denly covered his mouth and rubbed his nose after he had been
asked a question by the interviewer. He used the Mouth Cover
for several seconds before answering, then returned to his open
pose. Up to that point in the role-play, the interviewee had kept
an open posture with his coat unbuttoned, palms visible,
nodding his head and leaning forward when he answered ques-
tions, so we thought the gestures might have been isolated or
out of context. On reviewing the videotape, we asked him
about the hand-to-mouth gesture and he said that when he
was asked the question, he thought he could have responded in
two ways: one negative, one positive. As he thought about the
negative answer and of how the interviewer might react to it,
he covered his mouth. When he thought of the positive answer,
however, his hand dropped away from his mouth and he
163
Why Bob Always Lost at Chess
Evaluation and Deceit Signals

--- Page 158 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
resumed an open posture. His uncertainty about the inter-
viewer's possible reaction to the negative reply had resulted in
the sudden Mouth Cover.
This illustrates how easy it can be to misinterpret a hand-to-
face gesture and to jump to wrong conclusions.
164

--- Page 159 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_159_00.jpeg]

Chapter 8
EYE SIGNALS
Some men have the ability to see
through solid surfaces
Throughout history, we've been preoccupied with the eyes and
their effect on human behaviour. Eye contact regulates conver-
sation, gives cues of dominance, 'He looked down his nose at
me' or forms the basis for suspecting a liar, 'Look me in the eye
when you say that!' We spend much of our face-to-face time
looking at the other person's face, so eye signals are a vital part
of being able to read a person's attitude and thoughts. When
people meet for the first time they make a series of quick
Judgements about each other, based largely on what they see.
We use phrases such as 'She looked daggers at him', 'He had
that gleam in his eye', 'She has big baby eyes', 'He has shifty eyes',
She has inviting eyes', 'She gave him a look to kill', 'She gave an
icy stare' or 'He gave me the evil eye'. We also say a person has
Bette Davis eyes, Spanish eyes, bedroom eyes, hard, angry, blank,
private, sad, happy, defiant, cold, jealous, unforgiving and pierc-
ing eyes. When we use these phrases we are unwittingly referring
165

--- Page 160 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_160_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_160_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
to the size of the person's pupils and to his gaze behaviour. The
eyes can be the most revealing and accurate of all human com-
munication signals because they are a focal point on the body
and the pupils work independently of conscious control.
The Dilating Pupils
In given light conditions, your pupils will dilate or contract as
your attitude and mood change from positive to negative and
vice versa. When someone becomes excited, their pupils can
dilate to up to four times their original size. Conversely, an
angry, negative mood causes the pupils to contract to what are
commonly known as 'beady little eyes' or 'snake eyes'. Lighter
eyes can look more attractive because it's easier to see the dila-
tion taking place.
Eckhard Hess, the former head of the Department of Psychol-
ogy at the University of Chicago and pioneer of the studies of
pupillometry, found that pupil size is affected by one's general
state of arousal. In general, pupil size increases when people
view something that stimulates them. Hess found that the
pupils of both heterosexual men and women dilate when
viewing pin-ups of the opposite sex and constrict when
viewing same-sex pin-ups. Similar findings have also been
obtained when people were asked to look at pleasant or
unpleasant pictures including foods, political figures, a dis-
abled child or war scenes, or when listening to music. Hess
also found that increases in pupil size are positively correlated
166
'Beady' eyes
Bedroom eyes

--- Page 161 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_161_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_161_01.jpeg]

Eye Signals
with mental activity associated with problem solving, reaching
maximum dilation as a person arrives at the solution.
We applied this research to the business world and demon-
strated how people rate models in photographs as more
attractive if the photo has been altered to make the pupil area
larger. This was an effective way to increase the sales of any
product that used a close-up of the face, such as women's cos-
metics, hair products and clothing. Using brochures in a direct
mail campaign, we were able to help increase the direct cata-
logue sales of Revlon lipsticks by 45% by enlarging the pupil
size of the models in the photographs.
Which picture do you find more attractive?
The eyes are a key signal in courtship and the purpose of eye
make-up is to emphasise eye display. If a woman is attracted to
a man, she will dilate her pupils at him and he is likely to
decode this signal correctly without knowing it. This is why
romantic encounters are most successful in dimly lit places
because everyone's pupils dilate and create the impression that
couples are interested in each other.
167

--- Page 162 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
When a man is excited by a woman, which part of
his body can grow to almost three times its size?
When lovers gaze deep into each other's eyes, they are
unknowingly looking for pupil-dilation signals and each
becomes excited by the dilation of the other's pupils. Research
has shown that when pornographic films are shown to men
their pupils can dilate to almost three times their size. Most
women's pupils gave the greatest dilation when looking at pic-
tures of mothers and babies. Young babies and children have
larger pupils than adults, and babies' pupils constantly dilate
when adults are present in an attempt to look as appealing as
possible and therefore receive constant attention. This is why
the bestselling children's toys almost always have oversized
pupils.
Research also shows that pupil dilation has a reciprocal
effect on the person who sees the dilated pupils. Men looking
at pictures of women with dilated pupils showed greater pupil
dilation than when they looked at pictures of women with
constricted pupils.
Take the Pupil Test
The ability to decode pupil dilation is hardwired into the brain
and happens completely automatically. To test this, cover dia-
gram B with your hand and ask someone to stare at the
'pupils' in illustration A. Then switch them to staring at illus-
tration B and you'll see how their pupils dilate to match the
illustration, because their brain thinks it's looking at eyes that
find it attractive. Women's pupils dilate faster than men's to
create rapport with what their brain sees as another person's
eyes.
168

--- Page 163 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_163_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_163_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_163_02.jpeg]

Eye Signals
Diagram A
Diagram B
Hess conducted a pupil response experiment by showing five pic-
tures to respondents: a naked male, a naked female, a baby, a
mother and baby, and a landscape. Predictably, men's pupils
dilated most at the naked female, gay men dilated most at the
naked male but women's pupils dilated most at the picture of the
mother and baby with the naked male picture coming in second.
Tests conducted with expert card players show that fewer
games were won by the experts when their opponents wore dark
glasses. For example, if an opponent was dealt four aces in a game
of poker, his rapid pupil dilation could be unconsciously detected
by the expert, who would 'sense' he should not bet on the next
hand. Dark glasses worn by the opponents eliminated pupil
signals and, as a result, the experts won fewer hands than usual.
Pupil decoding was used by the ancient Chinese gem traders
who watched for the pupil dilation of their buyers when negoti-
ating prices. Centuries ago, prostitutes put drops of belladonna,
a tincture containing atropine,
into their eyes to dilate their
Pupils and to make themselves
appear more desirable.
David Bowie has different-
coloured eyes - one blue and
one hazel - and one is perma-
nently dilated; this condition is
called Heterochromia and it
affects 1% of the population.
Bowie's eye variations are the
result of a punch-up over a girl-
friend at the age of 12
169

--- Page 164 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
An old cliche says, 'Look a person in the eye when you talk
to them' when you are communicating or negotiating, but it's
better to practise 'looking them in the pupil' as the pupils will
tell you their real feelings.
Humans are the only primates that have whites of the eye,
known as the sclera — apes' eyes are completely dark. The
white of the eye evolved as a communication aid to allow
humans to see where other people were looking, because direc-
tion is linked to emotional states. Women's brains have more
hardwiring than men's to read emotions, and one consequence
of this is that women have more white of the eye than men.
Apes lack eye-whites, which means that their prey don't know
Giving Them the Eye
170
Dr Simon Baron-Cohen at Cambridge University conducted
some tests where subjects were shown photographs in which
only a narrow strip of the face across both eyes was visible.
The subjects were asked to choose between mental states
expressed in the photographs such as 'friendly', 'relaxed',
'hostile' and 'worried' and attitudes such as 'desire for you'
and 'desire for someone else'.
Statistically, pure guesswork would result in half the answers
being correct but men's average score was 19 out of 25 while
women scored 22 out of 25. This test shows that both sexes
have a greater ability to decode eye signals than body signals
and that women are better at it than men. Scientists don't yet
know how this eye information is sent or decoded, they simply
know that we can do it. Autistic people - who are nearly all
males - scored the lowest. Autistic brains lack the ability to
read people's body language and this is one reason why autis-
tic people have difficulty in forming social relationships, even
though many have very high IQs.
Women Are Better at It, as Usual

--- Page 165 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_165_00.jpeg]

The Eyebrow Flash
This gesture is a long-distance 'hello' greeting signal which has
been used everywhere since ancient times. The
 Eyebrow Flash
is universal and is also used by monkeys and apes as a social
greeting signal, confirming that it's an inborn gesture. The
eyebrows rise rapidly for a split second and then drop again
and its purpose is to draw attention to the face so that clear
signals can be exchanged. The only culture that doesn't use it
is the Japanese, where it's considered improper or impolite and
has definite sexual connotations.
The Eyebrow Flash
This is an unconscious signal that acknowledges the other
Person's presence and is probably linked to the fear reaction of
being surprised, or saying, 'I'm surprised and afraid of you',
which translates to 'I acknowledge you and am not threaten-
ing'. We don't Eyebrow Flash strangers we pass in the street or
People we don't like, and people who don't give the Eyebrow
Flash on initial greeting are perceived as potentially aggressive.
Try this simple test and you'll discover first hand the power of
the Eyebrow Flash — sit in the lobby of a hotel and Eyebrow
Flash everyone who goes past. You'll see that not only do
others return the Flash and smile, many will come over and
171
Eye Signals
where the ape is looking or whether they have been spotted,
giving the ape a greater chance of hunting success.
Humans are the only primates with
pronounced whites of the eye.

--- Page 166 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_166_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_166_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_166_02.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
begin to talk to you. The golden rule is always Eyebrow Flash
people you like or those who you want to like you.
Eye Widening
Lowering the eyebrows is how humans show dominance or
aggression towards others, whereas raising the eyebrows shows
submission. Keating & Keating found that several species of
apes and monkeys use exactly the same gestures for the same
purpose. They also found that people who intentionally raise
their eyebrows are perceived as submissive by both humans and
apes, and that those who lower them are perceived as aggressive.
In
 Why Men Lie & Women Cry
 (Orion) we showed how
women widen their eyes by raising their eyebrows and eyelids
to create the 'baby face' appearance of a small infant. This has
a powerful effect on men by releasing hormones into the brain,
which stimulate the desire to protect and defend females.
Women pluck and redraw their eyebrows higher up the fore-
head to appear more submissive because, on a subconscious
level at least, they know it appeals to men. If men trim their
eyebrows they do it from the top of the eyebrow down to make
their eyes appear narrower and more authoritative.
High-placed eyebrows gave Marilyn Monroe a submissive appearance while
low-set eyebrows gave James Cagney his aggressive look and JFK's turned-in
eyebrows made him appear both authoritative and concerned
72

--- Page 167 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_167_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_167_01.jpeg]

Eye Signals
John F Kennedy had what are known as 'medially down-
turned' eyebrows, which gave his face a permanently
concerned look that appealed to voters. If he'd had big bushy
eyebrows like actor James Cagney's he would have had a less
powerful impact on the electorate.
Lowering 
the 
head 
and
looking up is another sub-
missive gesture that appeals
to men because it makes the
eyes appear larger and makes
a woman appear more child-
like. This is because children
are so much smaller than
adults and spend their looking time gazing up and this creates
a parenting reaction in both men and women.
Princess Diana used the 'Looking Up' cluster to evoke world
empathy during her marital problems
173
Princess Diana at the age of eight -
like most young girls, she silently
understood the impact of putting
the head down and looking up
The 'Looking Up' Cluster

--- Page 168 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_168_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Princess Diana made an art form out of keeping her chin down
while looking up and exposing her vulnerable neck. This child
like gesture cluster triggered maternal and paternal reactions
towards her in millions of people, especially when she seemed
to be under attack by the British Royal Family. People who use
these submissive clusters usually don't practise them con-
sciously but know that when they use them, they get a result
How Men's Fires Get Lit
Marilyn Monroe was the
master of using female
pre-orgasmic expressions
and body language, and she
understood, at least on a
subconscious level, how it
could make most men
go weak at the knees
Lowering the eyelids
while 
simultaneously
raising the eyebrows,
looking up and slightly
parting the lips is a
cluster that has been
used by women for cen-
turies to show sexual
submissiveness. This is
one of the trademarks of the sex sirens such as Marilyn
Monroe, Deborah Harry and Sharon Stone.
Not only does this gesture maximise the distance between
the eyelid and eyebrows, it also gives the person a mysterious,
secretive look and new research shows that this is the expres-
sion many women have on their faces immediately before
having an orgasm.
174

--- Page 169 ---

Eye Signals
Gaze Behaviour-Where Do You Look?
It is only when you see 'eye to eye' with another person that a
real basis for communication can be established. While some
people can make us feel comfortable when they talk with us,
others make us feel ill at ease and some seem untrustworthy.
Initially, this has to do with the length of time that they look
at us or with how long they hold our gaze as they speak.
Michael Argyle, a pioneer of social psychology and non-
verbal communication skills in Britain, found that when
Westerners and Europeans talk, their average gaze time is 61 %,
consisting of 41% gaze time when talking, 75% when listening
and 31% mutual gazing. He recorded the average gaze length
to be 2.95 seconds and the length of a mutual gaze was 1.18
seconds. We found that the amount of eye contact in a typical
conversation ranges from 25% to 100%, depending on who's
talking and what culture they're from. When we talk we main-
tain 40 to 60% eye contact with an average of 80% eye contact
when listening. The notable exception to this rule is Japan and
some Asian and South American cultures, where extended eye
contact is seen as aggressive or disrespectful. The Japanese tend
to look away or at your throat, which can be disconcerting for
culturally inexperienced Westerners and Europeans.
Argyle found that when person A likes person B, he will
look at him a lot. This causes B to think that A likes him, so B
will like A in return. In other words, in most cultures, to build
a good rapport with another person, your gaze should meet
theirs about 60 to 70% of the time. This will also cause them
to begin to like you. It is not surprising, therefore, that the
nervous, timid person who meets our gaze less than one-third
of the time is rarely trusted. This is also why, in negotiations,
dark tinted glasses should be avoided as they make others feel
you are either staring at them or trying to avoid them.
He
 married her for her looks, but not
the ones she's been giving him lately.
175

--- Page 170 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
As with most body language and gestures, the length of time
that one person gazes at another can be culturally determined
Always be sure to consider cultural circumstances before
jumping to conclusions. The safest rule when travelling to
places such as Japan is to mirror the gaze time of your hosts.
When two people meet and make eye contact for the first
time, it's usually the person who is subordinate who looks
away first. This means that
 not
 looking away becomes a subtle
way to deliver a challenge or show disagreement when
someone gives their opinion or point of view. Where the status
of the other person is higher, however, for example, the person
is your boss, you can send a clear message of disagreement by
holding his gaze for only several seconds longer than would be
usually acceptable. But it's not a good idea to do this regularly
with your boss if you want to keep your job.
How to Keep Eye Contact in a Nudist Colony
We sent a group of non-nudists to a nudist colony and filmed
where they were looking when they were introduced to new
people. All the non-nudist men reported that they had trouble
resisting the urge to look down and the video replay showed
how obvious it was when they
 did
 look down. The women said
they did not experience these problems and rarely was a
woman filmed intentionally gazing towards the nether regions.
This is because men are equipped with a form of tunnel vision
that makes them far better than women at seeing directly in
front of them and over long distances for spotting targets.
Most men's close range and peripheral vision is far poorer
than women's, however, which is why men have difficulty
seeing things in refrigerators, cupboards and drawers.
Women's peripheral vision extends to at least 45 degrees to
each side, above and below, which means she can appear to be
looking at someone's face while, at the same time, she is
inspecting their goods and chattels.
176

--- Page 171 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_171_00.jpeg]

Eye Signals
Women's wider peripheral vision lets them appear to be looking in
one direction when they are, in fact, looking in another.
How to Grab a Man's Attention
When a woman wants to get a man's attention across a room
she will meet his gaze, hold it for two to three seconds, then
look away and down. This gaze is long enough for her to send
him a message of interest and potential submission. An exper-
iment by Monika Moore PhD, of Websters University, showed
that most men are not hardwired to read a woman's first gaze
signal so she usually needs to repeat it three times before the
average man picks up on it, four times for really slow men and
five or more times for the especially thick. When she finally
gets his attention she will often use a small version of the
Eyebrow Flash that is a small, subtle eye-widening gesture that
tells him the signal was intended for him.
Sometimes a simple face-to-face verbal approach of 'Hey, I
like you!' is more effective on men who are slow on the uptake.
Most Liars Look You in the Eye
As we said earlier, many people associate lying with looking
away. We conducted a series of experiments where participants
77

--- Page 172 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
were told to tell a series of lies to others in recorded inter-
views. The recordings were used in our communication
seminars where viewers were asked to judge who was lying and
who wasn't. What we discovered was contrary to a popular
belief about liars. Approximately 30% of the liars constantly
looked away when they lied and the viewers spotted these lies
around 80% of the time, with women having a better catch
rate than men. The other 70% of the liars maintained strong
eye contact with their victim, assuming they were less likely to
get caught if they did the
 opposite
 of what people expected.
They were right. Lie-catching dropped to an average of 25%,
with men scoring a dismal 15% success and women 35%.
Women's more intuitive brains were better than men's in
detecting voice changes, pupil dilation and other cues that
gave the liar away. This shows that gaze alone is not a reliable
signal of lying and you need to observe other gestures as well.
When a person's gaze meets yours for more than two-thirds
of the time, it can mean one of two things: first, he finds you
interesting or appealing, in which case he'll also have dilated
pupils; or second, he's hostile towards you and could be issuing
a challenge, in which case the pupils will be constricted. As
mentioned, women are good at deciphering pupil signals and
can differentiate interest from aggression, but men are signifi-
cantly worse at doing it. This is why the average man can't tell
if a woman is about to give him a kiss or a slap in the face.
How to Avoid being Attacked or Abused
Most primates avert their gaze to show submission. If an ape
is going to display aggression or is likely to attack, it will lock
eyes onto its victim. To avoid being attacked, the victim win
look away and try to make itself appear smaller. Scientific evi-
dence shows that submission behaviour appears to be
hardwired into primate brains for survival reasons. Under
attack, we make ourselves appear smaller by hunching our
shoulders, pulling our arms in close to the body, pressing our
178

--- Page 173 ---

Eye Signals
knees together and locking our ankles under a chair, dropping
our chin to the chest to protect the throat and averting our
gaze by looking away. These gestures activate an 'off switch' in
the brain of the aggressor and the attack can be avoided.
Making yourself appear smaller turns off
the aggression switch in an aggressor's brain.
This is an ideal position to take if you are being reprimanded
by a superior when you actually deserve the reprimand, but it
would be detrimental against a random street attack. From a
person who is walking past a group of possible assailants in
the street it would signal fear and this can contribute to incit-
ing an attack. If you walk upright with larger movements,
swinging your arms and legs and having your front open, you
will project that you could defend yourself if necessary and so
are less likely to be attacked.
The Sideways Glance
The
 Sideways Glance
 is used to communicate interest, uncer-
tainty or hostility. When it is combined with slightly raised
eyebrows or a smile, it communicates interest and is frequently
used as a courtship signal, mostly by women. If it is clustered
with down-turned eyebrows, furrowed brow or the corners of
the mouth down-turned, it signals a suspicious, hostile or crit-
ical attitude.
Extended Blinking
A normal, relaxed blinking rate is six to eight blinks per
minute and the eyes are closed for only about one tenth of a
second. People under pressure, for instance when they are
lying, are likely to dramatically increase their blinking rate.
179

--- Page 174 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_174_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Extended Blinking
 is an unconscious attempt by the person's
brain to block you from their sight because they've become
bored or disinterested or feel they're superior to you. It's as if
their brain can no longer tolerate dealing with you so their
eyes shut for two to three seconds or longer to wipe you from
sight and remain closed as the person momentarily removes
you from his mind.
Shutting you out
Superior types may also tilt their head back to give you a 'long
look', commonly known as 'looking down one's nose'; this is
also done by a person who feels that their importance is not
being noticed. This is mainly a Western cultural gesture and a
speciality of English people who feel they are upper-class. If you
see this happening during a conversation, it's a signal that you're
not doing well and that a new tack is needed. If you believe the
person is simply arrogant, try this: when they've closed their
eyes for the third or fourth time, quickly step a pace to your left
or right. When their eyelids lift again, it gives the illusion that
you've disappeared and materialised in another place and this
can really rattle them. If the person also starts snoring, you can
safely assume that your communication has failed.
Darting Eyes
When the eyes dart from side to side it can look as if the
person is checking out the activity in the room but the reality
is that the brain is searching for escape routes (just as happens
180

--- Page 175 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_175_00.jpeg]

Eye Signals
in monkeys and apes), revealing a person's insecurity about
what is happening.
When you're with a particularly boring individual, your
natural urge is to look away for escape routes. But because
most of us are aware that looking away shows a lack of inter-
est in the other person and signals our desire to escape, we look
m
ore
 at the boring individual and use a Tight-Lipped Smile to
feign interest. This behaviour parallels what liars are doing
when they increase their eye contact to appear convincing.
The Geography of the Face
The geographical area of a person's face and body that you
gaze upon can also dramatically affect the outcome of a face-
to-face encounter.
When you've finished reading this next section, try out the
techniques we discuss as soon as possible — without warning
anyone — and you'll experience the powerful effect these skills
can have. It takes about a week of practice for these eye tech-
niques to become a normal part of your communication skills.
There are three basic types of gazing:
 Social Gazing, Inti-
mate Gazing
 and
 Power Gazing.
1.The Social Gaze
Experiments into gazing reveal that during
social encounters the gazer's eyes look in a tri-
angular area on the other person's face
between the eyes and the mouth for about
90% of the gaze time.
This is the area of the face we look at in a
non-threatening environment. 
The 
other
Person will perceive you as non-aggressive.
The Social
Gazing area
2.The Intimate Gaze
When people approach each other from a distance, they look
quickly between the other person's face and lower body to first
181

--- Page 176 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_176_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_176_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
establish what the sex of the person is and then a second time
to determine a level of interest in them. This gaze is across the
eyes and below the chin to lower parts of the person's body. In
close encounters, it's the triangular area between the eyes and
the chest and for distant gazing it's from the eyes to the groin
or below.
Men and women use this gaze to show interest in each other
and those who are interested will return the gaze. We usually
give two quick glances and then look at their face and, despite
most people's strong denials about it, hidden camera studies
reveal that everyone does it, including nuns.
As we said earlier, a woman's wider-ranging
peripheral vision, however, allows her to check
out a man's body from head to toe without
getting caught. Male tunnel vision is why a
man will move his gaze up and down a
woman's body in a very obvious way. This is
also the reason why men are constantly
accused of ogling women's bodies at close
range but women are rarely accused of the
same, even though research shows that women do more of it
than men. It's not that men are bigger oglers than women -
men's tunnel vision means they keep getting caught.
The Intimate
Gaze zone
Women's wider peripheral vision means never getting caught;
Men's Tunnel Vision means always getting caught
182

--- Page 177 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_177_00.jpeg]

Eye Signals
Looking down towards the ground during conversation serves
different purposes for men and women. For a man, it lets him
give a woman the once over. For a woman, it has the dual
purpose of letting her check him out and at the same time send
a submissive signal of looking away and down.
Why do men have trouble making eye contact?
Breasts don't have eyes.
3.The Power Gaze
Imagine the person has a third eye in the
centre of their forehead and look in a triangu-
lar area between the person's 'three' eyes. The
impact this gaze has on the other person has
to be experienced to be believed.
Not only does it change the atmosphere to
very serious, it can stop a bore dead in their
tracks. By keeping your gaze directed at this
area, you keep the screws firmly on them.
Provided your gaze doesn't drop below the level of their
eyes, the pressure will stay on them. Never use this in friendly
or romantic encounters. But it works a treat on the person who
you want to intimidate or on the person who simply won't
shut up.
The Power Stare
If you have soft, weak or wimpy eyes practise using the
 Power
Stare
 to give yourself more authority. When you are under
attack from someone, try not to blink while maintaining
eye contact. When you look at the attacker, narrow your
eyelids and focus closely on the person. This is what pred-
atory animals do just before they strike their prey. When
you pan your eyes from one person to another without blink-
ing it has an unnerving effect on anyone who watches you
do it.
The Power Gaze
183

--- Page 178 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_178_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Don't mess with the
Terminator
To do this, move your eyeballs first and then let your head
follow, but your shoulders should remain still. The Power Stare
was used by Arnold Schwarzenegger as The Terminator and
can strike fear into the hearts of would-be intimidators. Better
still, have a policy of dealing only with pleasant people so
you'll never need to whip out your Power Stare.
The Politician's Story
When someone looks around from side to side or won't look us
in the eye when they talk, our trust in their credibility dimin-
ishes dramatically, even though they may be doing it because of
shyness. We had a politician client who was a novice at being
interviewed on television and he constantly flicked his eyes
between the reporters and the cameras when he was being inter-
viewed. This had the effect of making him look shifty-eyed on
the screen and each time he appeared on television his popular-
ity decreased. By training him simply to look at only the
reporter and ignore the cameras, his credibility increased. We
trained another politician to address his answers mainly to the
lens of the television camera when he participated in a televised
political debate. While this alienated the 150 studio audience
guests it impressed millions of television viewers, who felt as 11
the politician was talking directly to them.
184

--- Page 179 ---

Eye Signals
Look Deep Into My Eyes, Baby
For a television show, we conducted an experiment using a
dating agency. A selected number of men were told that their
next date was well matched to them and that they should
expect to have a successful, fun time. We explained to each
man that his date had suffered an injury to one eye as a child
and that she was very sensitive about it because the eye didn't
track properly. We said we weren't sure which eye it was, but if
he looked closely he'd be able to pick it. Each woman was also
told the same story about her date and that if she too looked
closely she'd be able to spot the slow eye. On their dates, the
couples spent the evening gazing into each other's eyes search-
ing in vain for the 'problem eye'. The outcome was that each
couple reported high levels of intimacy and romance on their
dates and the likelihood of the couple meeting again for a
second date was 200% higher than the agency average.
Extended gazing can create intimate feelings.
You can also drive couples apart by telling them that their date
has a hearing problem and that they'd need to talk about 10%
louder than their date to be heard. This results in a couple
talking louder and louder as the evening progresses to the
point where they are yelling at each other.
The First 20 Seconds of an Interview
Many people are taught that, in a sales or job interview, you
should maintain strong eye contact with the other person and
keep it up until you are seated. This creates problems for both
the interviewer and interviewee because it's contrary to the
process we like to go through when we meet someone new. A
man wants to check out a woman's hair, legs, body shape and
overall presentation. If she maintains eye contact it restricts
185

--- Page 180 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
this process so he's left trying to steal glances at her during the
interview without getting caught and so he becomes distracted
from the actual job of interviewing. Some women are disap-
pointed that, in a supposedly equal business world, men still
do this, but hidden cameras show this to be a fact of business
life whether we like it or not.
Like it or not, everyone steals a look at a woman's rear when
she leaves a room, even if they don't like her front view.
Video cameras also reveal that women interviewers go through
the same evaluation process with both male and female inter-
viewees but women's wider peripheral vision means they rarely
get caught. Women are also more critical than men of female
interviewees whose appearance doesn't stack up. Women look
at a male candidate's hair length, clothes design and co-ordi-
nation, the creases in his trousers and shine on his shoes. Most
men are completely unaware that women look at the condition
of the
 back
 of his shoes as he walks out.
Solution
When you go for an interview, shake hands and then give the
interviewer a two- to three-second frame of uninterrupted
time for them to complete the process of looking you over.
Look down to open your briefcase or folder, or to arrange any
papers you might need, turn to hang up your coat, or move
your chair in closer, and then look up. In filming sales inter-
views, we found that not only did the interviews feel better for
the salespeople who used this strategy, it added up to a better
outcome in sales results.
What Channel Are You Tuned to?
A person's eye movements can reveal what their mind is focus-
ing on by telling you whether they are remembering something
186

--- Page 181 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_181_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_181_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_181_02.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_181_03.jpeg]

Eye Signals
they have seen, heard, smelled, tasted or touched. This tech-
nique is a development of American psychologists Grinder
and Bandler and is known as
 Neurolinguistic Programming,
 or
NLP.
In simple terms, if a person is remembering something that
they saw, their eyes will move upward. If they are recalling
something they heard, they look to the side and tilt their head
as if listening. If they are recalling a feeling or emotion, they'll
look down and to the right. When a person is mentally talking
to themselves, they look down and to the left.
A. Recalling a picture
B. Recalling a sound
C. Recalling a feeling
D. Talking to oneself
The difficulty is that these eye movements can occur in a frac-
tion of a second and come in clusters making it harder to read
'live'. A videotape replay, however, can let you see discrepan-
187

--- Page 182 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
cies between what a person says and what they really think.
Thirty-five per cent of people prefer the visual information
channel and will use phrases such as 'I see what you mean'
'Can you look into that?', 'That's perfectly clear' or 'Can you
show me that?' and you will get their attention by showing
them photos, charts and graphs and asking if they 'Get the
picture'.
Twenty-five per cent prefer the auditory channel and use
words such as 'That rings a bell', 'I hear you', 'That doesn't
sound right' and that they want to be 'in tune' with you. The
other 40% prefer the feelings channel and will say 'Let's kick
that idea around', 'Our department needs a shot in the arm',
'I can't quite grasp what you're saying'. They love to test drive
things and be involved in a demonstration so that they can
'grasp the idea'.
NLP is a remarkable discovery and a powerful communica-
tions tool that should be addressed as separate subject. We
suggest you follow up by reading the work by Grinder and
Bandler mentioned in the reference section at the back of this
book.
How to Hold Eye Contact with an Audience
As professional conference speakers, we developed a technique
for keeping an audience's attention and letting them feel
involved. In groups of up to 50 people it's possible to meet the
gaze of each individual. In larger groups you usually stand
further back, so a different approach is needed. By pegging a
real or imaginary point or person at each corner of the group
and one in the centre, when you stand at a distance of 10 yards
(10m) from the front row, approximately 20 people in a group
of up to 50 will feel you are looking at them individually as
you speak and so you can create an intimate bond with most
of your audience.
188

--- Page 183 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_183_00.jpeg]

How to Present Visual Information
Eye Signals
Impact on the brain of information from the
senses during a visual presentation
The Wharton study in the United States found that the reten-
tion of verbal presentations was only 10%. This means that a
verbal presentation requires frequent repetition of key points
to be effective. By comparison, the retention rate of combined
verbal and visual presentations is 50%. This means you will
achieve a 400% increase in efficiency through the use of visual
aids. The study also found that using visual aids cuts the
average business meeting time from 25.7 minutes to 18.6
minutes - a 28% time saving.
The Power Lift
To keep control of where a person is looking, use a pen to
Point to the presentation and, at the same time, verbalise what
he sees. Next, lift the pen from the presentation and hold it
189
When you are giving a visual presentation using books, charts,
graphs or a laptop it's important to know how to control
where the other person is looking. Research shows that of the
information relayed to the brain in visual presentations, 83%
comes via the eyes, 11% via the ears, and 6% through the
other senses.

--- Page 184 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_184_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_184_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
between his eyes and your eyes. This has the magnetic effect of
lifting his head so that now he is looking at you and he sees
and hears what you are saying, achieving maximum absorp-
tion of your message. Keep the palm of your other hand open
when you are speaking.
The Power Lift — using the pen to control where a
person looks during a presentation
We also found that women hold more direct eye contact than
men during presentations, especially when they are not
talking. When women are talking, however, they avert their
eyes more than men do.
Men stare more at women than vice versa and men give less
direct eye contact when listening to other men than when lis-
tening to women.
Summary
Where you direct your gaze has a powerful impact on the
outcome of a face-to-face encounter. If you were a manager
who was going to reprimand an errant subordinate or a parent
reprimanding a child, which gaze would you use? If you use
Social Gazing, the sting would be taken out of your words,
regardless of how loud or threatening you might try to sound.
Social Gazing would weaken your words but Intimate Gazing
could either intimidate or embarrass them. Power Gazing,
however, has a powerful effect on the receiver and tells them
you mean business.
90

--- Page 185 ---

Eye Signals
Using the right gaze gives credibility.
What men describe as the 'come-on' look that women use
relates to a sideways glance, dilated pupils and Intimate
Gazing. If a woman wants to play hard to get, she needs to
avoid using an Intimate Gaze and use Social Gazing instead.
But most men miss a lot of it anyway. To use a Power Gaze
during courting would leave a man or woman labelled as cold
or unfriendly. When you use an Intimate Gaze on a potential
partner, however, you give the game away. Women are expert at
sending and receiving this gaze but, unfortunately, most men
are not. When men use the Intimate Gaze it's usually blatantly
obvious to women and men are generally unaware of having
been given an Intimate Gaze by a woman, much to the frus-
tration of the woman who gave it.
91

--- Page 186 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_186_00.jpeg]

Chapter 9
SPACE INVADERS -
TERRITORIES AND
PERSONAL SPACE
'Excuse me...but you're sitting in my seat!'
Thousands of books and articles have been written about the
staking out and guarding of territories by animals, birds, fish
and primates, but only in recent years has it been discovered
that man also has territories. When you understand the impli-
cations of this, you can gain enormous insights into your own
behaviour, and the face-to-face reactions of others can be pre-
dicted. American anthropologist Edward Hall was one of the
pioneers in the study of man's spatial needs and in the early
1960s he coined the word 'proxemics', from 'proximity' or
nearness. His research into this field led to new understanding
about our relationships with each other.
Every country is a territory staked out by clearly defined
boundaries and sometimes protected by armed guards. Within
each country there are usually smaller territories in the form of
states and counties. Within these are even smaller territories
192

--- Page 187 ---

Space Invaders
 —
 Territories and Personal Space
called cities and towns, within which are suburbs, containing
many streets that, in themselves, represent a closed territory to
those who live there. In the cinema it's an armrest where we do
silent battle with strangers who try to claim it. The inhabitants
of each territory share an intangible allegiance to it and have
been known to turn to savagery and killing in order to protect
it.
A territory is also an area or space around a person that he
claims as his own, as if it were an extension of his body. Each
person has his own personal territory, which includes the area
that exists around his possessions, such as his home, which is
bounded by fences, the inside of his motor vehicle, his own
bedroom or personal chair and, as Dr Hall discovered, a
defined air space around his body.
This chapter will deal mainly with the implications of this
air space, how people react when it is invaded and the impor-
tance of sometimes keeping an 'arms-length' relationship.
Personal Space
Most animals have a certain air space around their bodies that
they claim as their personal space. How far the space extends
depends mainly on how crowded the conditions were in which
the animal was raised and the local population density. So per-
sonal territory can expand or contract depending on the local
circumstances. A lion raised in the remote regions of Africa
may have a territorial space with a radius of 30 miles (50 kilo-
metres) or more, depending on the density of the lion
population in that area, and it marks its territory by urinating
or defecating around the boundaries. On the other hand, a
lion raised in captivity with other lions may have a personal
space of only several yards (metres), the direct result of
crowded conditions.
Like most animals, each human has his own personal
Portable 'air bubble', which he carries around with him; its
size is dependent on the density of the population in the place
193

--- Page 188 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_188_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
where he grew up.
 Personal Space
 is therefore culturally deter-
mined. Where some cultures, such as the Japanese, are
accustomed to crowding, others prefer the 'wide open spaces'
and like you to keep your distance.
Personal space — the portable bubble
we all carry around with us
Research shows that people in prisons
appear to have larger personal space needs
than most of the community, which results
in the prisoners being constantly aggressive
when approached by others. Solitary con-
finement, where no others are in the
prisoner's space, always has a calming
effect. Violence from passengers on aircraft increased during
the 1990s when the airlines started packing people close
together in the seats to compensate for revenue lost as a result
of price discounting.
Zone Distances
We'll now discuss the radius of the 'air bubble' around subur-
ban middle-class people living in places such as Australia, New
Zealand, Great Britain, North America, Northern Europe,
Scandinavia, Canada or anywhere a culture is 'Westernised'
such as Singapore, Guam and Iceland. The country in which
you personally live may have larger or smaller territories than
those we discuss here, but they will be proportionately the
same as the ones we discuss here. Children have learned this
spacing by age 12 and it can be broken down into four distinct
zone distances:
1. The Intimate Zone
 between 6 and 18 inches (15-45 cen-
timetres). Of all the zone distances, this is by far the most
important, as it is this zone that a person guards as if it were
194

--- Page 189 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_189_00.jpeg]

Space Invaders
 -
 Territories and Personal Space
his own property. Only those who are emotionally close to us
are permitted to enter. These include lovers, parents, spouse,
children close friends, relatives and pets. There is a sub-zone
that extends up to 6 inches (15cm) from the body that can be
entered only during intimate physical contact. This is the close
Intimate Zone.
2.
 The Personal Zone
 between 18 inches and 48 inches
(46cm—1.22m). This is the distance that we stand from others
at cocktail parties, office parties, social functions and friendly
gatherings.
3.
 The Social Zone
 between 4 and 12 feet
 (1.22~3.6m).
 We
stand at this distance from strangers, the plumber or carpen-
ter doing repairs around our home, the postman, the local
shopkeeper, the new employee at work and people whom we
don't know very well.
4.
 The
 Public Zone
 is over 12 feet (3.6m). Whenever we address
a large group of people, this is the comfortable distance at
which we choose to stand.
Personal Zone distances
All these distances tend to reduce between two women and
increase between two men.
195

--- Page 190 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Practical Applications of Zone Distances
Our Intimate Zone (between 6 and 18 inches, 15-45cm) is nor-
mally entered by another person for one of two reasons: first
the intruder is a close relative or friend, or he or she may be
making sexual advances; second, the intruder is hostile and
may be about to attack. While we will tolerate strangers
moving within our
 Personal
 and
 Social Zones,
 the intrusion of
a stranger into our Intimate Zone causes physiological
changes to take place within our bodies. The heart pumps
faster, adrenalin pours into the bloodstream, and blood is
pumped to the brain and the muscles as physical preparations
for a possible fight or flight situation are made.
This means that putting your arm, in a friendly way, around
someone you've just met may result in that person feeling neg-
ative towards you, even though they may smile and appear to
enjoy it in order not to offend you. .
Women stand slightly closer to one another, face each
other more and touch more than men do with other men.
If you want people to feel comfortable around you, the golden
rule is 'keep your distance'. The more intimate our relationship is
with other people, the closer they will permit us to move within
their zones. For example, a new work employee may initially feel
that the other staff members are cold towards him, but they are
only keeping him in the Social Zone until they know him better.
As he becomes better known to them, the distance between them
decreases until eventually he is permitted to move within their
Personal Zones and, in some cases, their Intimate Zones.
Who Is Moving In on Whom?
The distance that two people keep their hips apart when they
embrace reveals clues about the relationship between them.
196

--- Page 191 ---

Space Invaders
 —
 Territories and Personal Space
Lovers press their torsos against each other and move within
each other's close Intimate Zones. This differs from the kiss
received from a stranger on New Year's Eve, from your best
friend's spouse or dear old Aunt Sally, all of whom keep their
pelvic area at least 6 inches (15cm) away from yours.
One of the exceptions to the distance/intimacy rule occurs
where the spatial distance is based on the person's social
standing. For example, the CEO of a company may be the
weekend fishing buddy of one of his subordinates and when
they go fishing each may move within the other's personal or
Intimate Zone. At the office, however, the CEO keeps his
fishing buddy at the social distance to maintain the unwritten
code of social strata rules.
Why We Hate Riding in Lifts
Crowding at concerts, cinemas, in trains or buses results in
unavoidable intrusion into other people's Intimate Zones, and
people's reactions are fascinating to watch. There is a list of
unwritten rules that most cultures follow rigidly when faced
with a crowded situation such as a packed lift, in a line at the
sandwich shop or on public transport.
Here are the common lift-riding rules:
1. There will be no talking to anyone, including a person you
know.
2. Avoid eye contact with others at all times.
3. Maintain a 'poker face' - no emotion is permitted to be
shown.
4. If you have a book or newspaper, pretend to be deeply
engrossed in it.
5. In bigger crowds, no body movement is allowed.
6. At all times, you must watch the floor numbers change at
all times.
This behaviour is called 'masking' and is common everywhere.
197

--- Page 192 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
It's simply each person's attempt to hide their emotions from
others by wearing a neutral mask.
We often hear words such as 'miserable', 'unhappy' and
'despondent' used to describe people who travel to work in the
rush hour on public transport. These labels are used to
describe the blank, expressionless look on the faces of the
travellers, but are misjudgements on the part of the observer.
What the observer sees, in fact, is a group of people masking
— adhering to the rules that apply to the unavoidable invasion
of their Intimate Zones in a crowded public place.
The people travelling on the Underground aren't
unhappy; they're just masking their emotions.
Notice how you behave next time you go alone to a crowded
cinema. As you choose a seat that is surrounded by a sea of
unknown faces, notice how, like a pre-programmed robot,
you will begin to obey the unwritten rules of masking in a
crowded public place. As you compete for territorial rights to
the armrest with the stranger beside you, you will begin to
realise why those who often go to a crowded cinema alone do
not take their seats until the lights are out and the film begins.
Whether we are in a crowded lift, cinema or bus, people
around us become non-persons — that is, they don't exist as far
as we're concerned and so we don't respond as if we were
being attacked if someone inadvertently encroaches on our
territory.
Why Mobs Become Angry
An angry mob or group of protesters fighting for a mutual
purpose does not react in the same way as an individual does
when his territory is invaded; in fact, something very different
occurs. As the density of the crowd increases, each individual
has less personal space and starts to feel hostile, which is why,
198

--- Page 193 ---

Space Invaders - Territories and Personal Space
as the size of the mob increases, it becomes angrier and uglier
and fights may break out. The police try to break up the crowd
so that each person can regain his own personal space and
become calmer.
Only in recent years have governments and town planners
begun to understand the effect that high-density housing proj-
ects have in depriving individuals of their personal territory.
The consequences of high-density living and overcrowding
were seen in a study of the deer population on James Island,
an island about a mile (2 kilometres) off the coast of Mary-
land in Chesapeake Bay in the United States. Many of the deer
were dying in large numbers, despite the fact that at the time
there was plenty of food, predators were not evident and infec-
tion was not present. Similar studies in earlier years with rats
and rabbits revealed the same trend and further investigation
showed that the deer had died as a result of overactive adrenal
glands, resulting from the stress caused by the degradation of
each deer's personal territory as the population increased. The
adrenal glands play an important part in the regulation of
growth, reproduction and the level of the body's defences. A
physiological reaction to the stress of overpopulation had
caused the deaths, not starvation, infection or aggression from
others. This is why areas that have the highest human popula-
tion density also have the highest crime and violence rates.
One of our deepest urges is the desire to own
land. This compulsion comes from the fact that it
gives us the space freedom we need.
Interrogators use territorial invasion techniques to break
down the resistance of criminals being questioned. They seat
the criminal on an armless, fixed chair in an open area of the
room and encroach into his intimate and close Intimate Zones
when asking questions, remaining there until he answers. It
often takes only a short while for this territorial harassment to
break down the criminal's resistance.
199

--- Page 194 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Spacing Rituals
When a person claims a space or an area among strangers
such as a seat at the cinema, a place at the conference table or
a towel hook at the health club, he does it in a predictable way.
He usually looks for the widest space available between two
others and claims the area in the centre. At the cinema he will
choose a seat that is halfway between the end of a row and
where the nearest person is sitting. At the health club, he
chooses the towel hook that is in the largest available space,
midway between two other towels or midway between the
nearest towel and the end of the towel rack. The purpose of
this ritual is to avoid offending the other people by being either
too close or too far away from them.
Doctors and hairdressers are given permission
to enter our Intimate Zones.
 We
 allow pets in at
any time because they're not threatening.
At the cinema, if you choose a seat more than halfway between
the end of the row and the nearest other person, that other
person may feel offended if you are too far away from him or
he may feel intimidated if you sit too close. The main purpose
of this spacing ritual is to maintain harmony and it appears to
be a learned behaviour.
An exception to this rule is the spacing that occurs in public
toilet blocks. We found that people choose the end toilets
about 90% of the time and, if they are occupied, the midway
principle is used. Men always try to avoid standing beside
strangers at a public urinal and always obey the unwritten law
of 'Death before eye contact'.
Try the Luncheon Test
Try this simple test next time you eat with someone. Unspoken
200

--- Page 195 ---

Space Invaders
 —
 Territories and Personal Space
territorial rules state that a restaurant table is divided equally
down the middle and the staff carefully place the salt, pepper,
sugar, flowers and other accessories equally on the centre line.
As the meal progresses, subtly move the salt cellar across to the
other person's side, then the pepper, flowers and so on. Before
long this subtle territorial invasion will cause a reaction in
your lunch-mate. They either sit back to regain their space or
start pushing everything back to the centre.
Cultural Factors Affecting Zone Distances
A young Italian couple migrated from Italy to live in Sydney,
Australia and were invited to join a local social club. Several
weeks after joining, three female members complained that
the Italian man was making sexual advances towards them and
that they felt uncomfortable around him. The male members
of the club felt that the Italian woman had also been behaving
as if she could be sexually available.
This situation illustrates the complications that can happen
when cultures with different space needs come together. Many
Southern Europeans have an intimate distance of only 8 to 11
inches (20—30cm) and in some places it's even less. The Italian
couple felt at ease and relaxed when standing at a distance of
10 inches (25cm) from the Australians but were totally
unaware of their intrusion into the Australians' 46-centimetre
Intimate Zone. Italian people also use more eye contact and
touch than Australians, which gave rise to further misjudge-
ments about their motives. The Italians were shocked when
this was pointed out to them but they resolved to practise
standing back at a more culturally accepted distance.
Moving into the Intimate Zone of the opposite sex is a way
of showing interest in that person and is commonly called an
advance'. If the advance into the Intimate Zone is rejected, the
other person will step backwards to reclaim their space. If the
advance is accepted, the other person holds his ground and
allows the intruder to remain. To measure a man's level of
201

--- Page 196 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_196_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_196_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
interest in her, a woman will step into his Intimate Zone and
then step back out again. If he's interested, this cues him to
step into her space whenever he makes a point.
The
 closer people feel emotionally to each other
the closer they will stand to each other.
What seemed to the Italian couple to be a perfectly normal
social encounter was being interpreted by the Australians as a
sexual advance. The Italians thought the Australians were
being cold and unfriendly because they kept moving away
from the Italians to keep a comfortable distance.
The acceptable conversational
distance for most Western,
Northern European and
Scandinavian city dwellers
A man with a smaller spatial need
forcing a woman to lean back to
defend her space
202

--- Page 197 ---

Space Invaders - Territories and Personal Space
The above illustration shows the negative reaction of a woman
on whose territory a man is encroaching. She leans backward,
attempting to keep a comfortable distance. However, the man
may be from a culture with a smaller Personal Zone and he is
moving forward to a distance that is comfortable for him. The
woman may interpret this as a sexual move.
Why Japanese Always Lead When They Waltz
At our international conferences, city-born Americans usually
stand 18 to 48 inches (46—122cm) from each other and stand in
the same place while talking. If you watch a Japanese and an
American talking, the two will slowly begin to move around
the room, the American moving backwards away from the
Japanese and the Japanese moving forward. This is an attempt
by both the American and Japanese to adjust to a culturally
comfortable distance from the other. The Japanese, with his
smaller 10-inch (25cm) Intimate Zone, continually steps
forward to adjust to his spatial need, but this invades the
American's Intimate Zone, forcing him to step backwards to
make his own spatial adjustment. Video recordings of this
phenomenon replayed at high speed give the illusion that the
two men are waltzing around the room with the Japanese
leading. This is one of the reasons why, when negotiating busi-
ness, Asians, Europeans or Americans often look at each other
with suspicion. The Europeans or Americans refer to the
Asians as 'pushy' and 'familiar' and the Asians refer to the
Europeans or Americans as 'cold', 'stand-offish' and 'cool'.
This lack of awareness of Intimate Zone variations between
cultures can easily lead to misconceptions and inaccurate
assumptions about one culture by another.
Country vs. City Spatial Zones
As mentioned, the amount of Personal Space someone needs is
203

--- Page 198 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_198_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_198_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
relative to the population density where they live. People raised
in sparsely populated rural areas for example, need more Per-
sonal Space than those raised in densely populated cities.
Watching how far a person extends his arm to shake hands
gives a clue to whether he is from a large city or a country area.
City dwellers typically have their private 18-inch (46cm)
'bubble'; this is also the measured distance between wrist and
torso when they reach to shake hands.
Two men from the
city greet each other;
their hands reaching
to 18 inches (46cm)
This allows the hands to meet on neutral territory. People
raised in a country town with a small population may have a
space 'bubble' of up to 36 inches (1m) or more and this is the
average measured distance from the wrist to the body when
the country person shakes hands.
Two people from a
country town reaching
out to
 36
 inches (lm)
Rural people tend to stand with their feet firmly planted on the
ground and lean forward to meet your handshake, whereas a
city dweller will step forward to greet you. People raised in
remote areas can have an even larger Personal Space need,
204

--- Page 199 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_199_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_199_01.jpeg]

Space Invaders
 -
 Territories and Personal Space
which could be as wide as 18 feet (6 metres). They often prefer
not to shake hands but would rather stand at a distance and
wave.
People from a
sparsely populated
area keeping their
distance
Farming equipment salespeople who live in cities find this
information useful for calling on farmers in sparse rural areas.
Considering, for example, that a farmer could have a 'bubble'
of 3 to 6 feet (1—2m) or more, a handshake could be seen as a
territorial intrusion, causing the farmer to react negatively or
defensively. Successful country salespeople state almost unani-
mously that the best negotiating conditions exist when they
greet the rural customer with an extended handshake and the
farmer from a remote area with a distant wave.
Territory and Ownership
Property a person owns or a space he regularly uses constitutes
a private territory and, just as with his personal bubble, he'll
fight to defend it. A person's home, office and car represent a
territory, each having clearly marked boundaries in the form of
walls, gates, fences and doors. Each territory may have several
sub-territories. For example, in a home a person's private ter-
ritory may be their kitchen and they'll object to anyone
invading it when they're using it; a businessman has his
favourite place at the conference table; diners have their
favourite seat in the cafe; and Mum or Dad have their favourite
chair at home. These areas are usually marked either by
leaving personal possessions on or around the area, or by fre-
205

--- Page 200 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
quent use of it. The cafe diner may even go so far as to carve
his initials into 'his' place at the table and the businessman
marks his territory at the conference table with things such as
a personal folder, pens, books and clothing spread around his
18-inch (46cm) Intimate Zone border.
Studies carried out by Desmond Morris into seating posi-
tions in libraries showed that leaving a book or personal object
on a library desk reserved that place for an average of 77
minutes; leaving a jacket over a chair reserved it for two hours.
At home a family member might mark his or her favourite
chair by leaving a personal object, such as a handbag or mag-
azine, on or near it to show their claim and ownership of the
space.
If the boss of the house asks a visitor to be seated and the
person innocently sits in the wrong chair, the boss can become
agitated about this invasion of his territory and be put on the
defensive. A simple question such as, 'Which chair is yours?'
can avoid the negative results of making such a territorial
error.
Car Territory
People driving a car can react in a way that's often completely
unlike their normal social, territorial behaviour.
A motor vehicle seems to have a magnifying effect on the
size of a person's Personal Space. In some cases, this territory
is magnified up to 10 times the normal size, so the driver feels
that he has a claim to an area of 25 to 30 feet (8-10 metres)
in front of and behind his car. When another driver cuts in
front of him, even if it wasn't dangerous, the driver may go
through a physiological change, becoming angry and even
attacking the other driver in what is now known as 'Road
Rage'. Compare this to the situation that occurs when the
same person is stepping into a lift and another person steps in
front of him, invading his personal territory. His reaction in
those circumstances is normally apologetic and he allows the
206

--- Page 201 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_201_00.jpeg]

Space Invaders - Territories and Personal Space
other person to go first: dramatically different from what
happens when the same person cuts in front of him on the
open road.
In a car, many people think they're invisible.That's why
they make intimate adjustments in full view of everyone.
For some people, the car becomes a protective cocoon in
which they can hide from the outside world. As they drive
slowly beside the kerb, almost in the gutter, they can be as
big a hazard on the road as the driver with the expanded
Personal Space. Italians, with their smaller spatial needs, are
often accused of being tail-gaters and pushy on the motor-
ways because they are closer than is culturally accepted
elsewhere.
Take the Test
Look at the next illustration and decide what the possible
scenarios could be between the two people, based entirely
on their spatial distances. A few simple questions and
further observation of these people can reveal the correct
answer and can help you avoid making incorrect assumptions.
Who is who and
from where?
207

--- Page 202 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
We could make any one of the following assumptions about
these people:
1. Both people are city dwellers and the man is making an
intimate approach to the woman.
2. The man has a smaller Intimate Zone than the woman and
is innocently invading hers.
3. The woman is from a culture with smaller Intimate Zone
needs.
4. The couple feel emotionally close to each other.
Summary
Others will invite or reject you, depending on the respect that
you have for their Personal Space. This is why the happy-go-
lucky person, who slaps everyone he meets on the back or
continually touches people during a conversation, is secretly
disliked by everyone. Many factors can affect the spatial dis-
tance a person takes in relation to others, so it's wise to
consider every criterion before making a judgement about why
a person is keeping a certain distance.
208

--- Page 203 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_203_00.jpeg]

Chapter 10
HOW THE LEGS
REVEAL WHAT THE
MIND WANTS TO DO
Mark sat there with his legs wide apart, stroking his tie and massaging
the salt shaker. He hadn't noticed that, for the past 20 minutes, her legs had
been crossed away from him and pointing towards the nearest exit.
The farther away from the brain a body part is positioned, the
less awareness we have of what it is doing. For example, most
people are aware of their face and what expressions and ges-
tures they are displaying and we can even practise some
expressions to 'put on a brave face' or 'give a disapproving
look', 'grin and bear it' or 'look happy' when Grandma gives
you ugly underwear again for your birthday. After our face, we
are less aware of our arms and hands, then our chest and
stomach and we are least aware of our legs and almost oblivi-
ous to our feet.
This means that the legs and feet are an important source of
information about someone's attitude because most people are
unaware of what they are doing with them and never consider
209

--- Page 204 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
faking gestures with them in the way that they would with
their face. A person can look composed and in control while
their foot is repetitively tapping or making short jabs in the air,
revealing their frustration at not being able to escape.
Jiggling the feet is like the brain's attempt to
run away from what is being experienced.
Everybody's Talking About a New Way
of Walking
The way people swing their arms when they walk gives insight
into their personality — or what they want you to believe
they're like. When young, healthy, vibrant people walk, they
walk faster than older people, which results in their arms
swinging higher in front and behind, and can even make it
look as if they're marching. This is partly due to their addi-
tional speed and greater muscle flexibility. As a consequence of
this, the army march evolved as an exaggerated walk to
portray the effect that the marchers are youthful and vigorous.
This same walk has been adopted by many politicians and
public figures who want to send out a message of their vitality.
That is why striding is a popular gait with many politicians.
Women's arms tend to swing even further back because their
arms bend further out from the elbow to enable them to carry
babies more effectively.
How Feet Tell the Truth
We conducted a series of tests with managers, who were
instructed to lie convincingly in a series of staged interviews.
We found that the managers, regardless of gender, dramati-
cally increased the unconscious number of foot movements
210

--- Page 205 ---

How the Legs Reveal What the Mind Wants to Do
they made when they were lying. Most managers used fake
facial expressions and tried to control their hands while lying
but almost all were unaware of what their feet and legs were
doing. These results were verified by psychologist Paul Ekman,
who discovered that not only do people increase their lower
body movements when they lie but observers have greater
success exposing a person's lies when they can see the liar's
entire body. This explains why many business executives feel
comfortable only when sitting behind a desk with a solid front,
where their lower body is hidden.
if you're not sure whether you're being
lied to or not, look under their desk.
Glass-topped tables cause us more stress than solid tables, as
our legs are in full view and so we don't feel as if we are in full
control.
The Purpose of the Legs
The legs evolved in humans to serve two purposes: to move
forward to get food and to run away from danger. Because the
human brain is hardwired for these two objectives - to go
towards what we want and move away from what we don't
want - the way a person uses their legs and feet reveals where
they want to go. In other words, they show a person's com-
mitment to leaving or staying in a conversation. Open or
uncrossed leg positions show an open or dominant attitude,
while crossed positions reveal closed attitudes or uncertainty.
A woman who is not interested in a man will fold her arms
on her chest and cross her legs away from him giving him the
'no-go' body language while an interested woman would open
herself to him.
211

--- Page 206 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_206_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_206_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
The Four Main Standing Positions
1. At Attention
This is a formal position that shows a neutral attitude with no
commitment to stay or go. In male—female encounters, it is
used more by women than men as it effectively keeps the legs
together like a 'No Comment' signal. Schoolchildren use it
when talking to a teacher, junior officers use it when talking to
senior officers, people meeting royalty do it and employees use
it when talking to the boss.
The Attention Stance
2. Legs Apart
As mentioned earlier, this is predominantly a male gesture and
is like a standing
 Crotch Display.
 The Crotch Displayer plants
both feet firmly on the ground, making a clear statement that
he has no intention of leaving. It is used as a dominance signal
by men because it highlights the genitals, giving the Crotch
Displayer a macho-looking attitude.
The Crotch Display - putting
his masculinity on show
212

--- Page 207 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_207_00.jpeg]

How the Legs Reveal What the Mind Wants to Do
Male participants at sports matches can be seen standing
around with each other in this position at half time and giving
their crotch a continual adjustment. These adjustments have
nothing to do with itching - they allow males to highlight their
masculinity and show solidarity as a team by all performing
the same actions.
The Crotch Display is used by
macho men and tough guys
3.The Foot-Forward
The body weight is shifted to one hip, which leaves the front
foot pointing forward. Paintings done during the Middle Ages
often show high status men standing in the
 Foot-Forward Posi-
tion
 as it allowed them to display their fine hosiery, shoes and
breeches.
213

--- Page 208 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_208_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_208_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
The Foot-Forward Position -
pointing at where the mind wants
to go
This a valuable clue to a person's immediate intentions,
because we point our lead foot in the direction our mind
would like to go and this stance looks as if the person is begin-
ning to walk. In a group situation, we point our lead foot at
the most interesting or attractive person but when we want to
leave, we point our feet at the nearest exit.
4. Leg Cross
The next time you attend a meeting with men and women you
will notice some groups of people standing with their arms
and legs crossed. Look more closely and you'll also see that
they are standing at a greater distance from each other than
the customary social distance.
The Standing-Leg-Cross
If they are wearing coats or jackets, they are likely to be but-
toned. This is how most people stand when they are among
214

--- Page 209 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_209_00.jpeg]

How the Legs Reveal What the Mind Wants to Do
people whom they don't know well. If you interact with them
you would find that one or all of them are unfamiliar with
others in the group.
While open legs can show openness or dominance, crossed
legs shows a closed, submissive or defensive attitude as they
symbolically deny any access to the genitals.
The Scissors - 'No comment'
but he's not leaving
For a woman, positions like the
 Scissors
 and the
 Single-Leg-Cross
send two messages: one, that she intends to stay, not leave; and
two, that access is denied. When a man does it, it also shows he'll
stay but wants to be sure you don't 'kick him where it hurts'.
Open legs display masculinity; closed legs protect masculinity. If
he's with men he feels are inferior to him, the Crotch Display feels
right; if he's with superior males, however, this gesture makes
him look competitive and he feels vulnerable. Studies show that
people who lack confidence also take Leg Cross positions.
Open legs show male confidence;
dosed legs show male reticence.
Imagine now that you notice another group of people standing
with arms unfolded, palms visible, coats unbuttoned, relaxed
appearance and leaning back on one leg with the other point-
ing towards others in the group. All are gesturing with their
hands and moving in and out of each other's Personal Space.
Closer investigation would reveal that these people are friends
or are known personally to each other. The first group of
2 1 5

--- Page 210 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_210_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
people with the closed arms and legs may have relaxed facial
expressions and conversation that sounds free and easy, but the
folded arms and legs tell us that they are not as relaxed or con-
fident with each other as they are trying to appear.
Try this: join a group where you know no one and stand with
your arms and legs tightly crossed and wear a serious expres-
sion. One by one the other group members will cross their arms
and legs and remain in that position until you, the stranger,
leave. Walk away and watch how, one by one, the members of
the group assume their original open poses once again.
Crossing the legs not only reveals negative or defensive emo-
tions, it makes a person appear insecure and causes others to
react accordingly.
Defensive, Cold or 'Just Comfortable'?
Some people will claim that they are not defensive or feeling
insecure when they cross their arms or legs, but do it because
they're cold. When someone wants to warm his hands he'll
thrust them under his armpits rather than tucking them under
the elbows, as is the case with a defensive arm-cross. Second,
when a person feels cold he may use a type of body hug and
when the legs are crossed they are usually straight, stiff and
pressed hard against each other as opposed to the more
relaxed leg posture of the defensive stance or position.
She's more likely to be cold or
just looking for the rest room
216

--- Page 211 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_211_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_211_01.jpeg]

How the Legs Reveal What the Mind Wants to Do
People who habitually cross their arms or legs prefer to say
that they are cold rather than admit that they could be
nervous, anxious or defensive. Others simply say they're 'com-
fortable'. That's probably true — when someone feels defensive
or insecure, crossed arms and legs feel comfortable because it
matches their emotional state.
How We Move from Closed to Open
As people begin to feel more comfortable in a group and get to
know others, they move through a series of movements taking
them from the defensive crossed arms and legs position to the
relaxed open position. This standing 'opening-up' procedure
follows the same sequence everywhere.
1. Uncertain about each other
2. Openness and acceptance
It begins with the closed position, arms and legs crossed (illus-
tration 1). As they begin to feel comfortable with each other
and rapport builds, their legs uncross first and their feet are
Placed together in the Attention Position. Next, the arm folded
on top in the arm-cross comes out and the palm is occasion-
ally flashed when speaking but is eventually not used as a
barrier. Instead, it may hold the outside of the other arm in a
217

--- Page 212 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_212_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_212_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Single-Arm-Barrier.
 Both arms unfold next, and one arm ges-
tures or may be placed on the hip or in the pocket. Finally, one
person takes the Foot-Forward Position, showing acceptance
of the other person (illustration 2).
The European Leg Cross
One leg is crossed neatly over the other, with 70% of people
crossing left over right. This is the normal crossed-leg position
used by European, Asian and British cultures.
The European/British
Leg Cross
When a person crosses both legs and arms they have emotion-
ally withdrawn from the conversation and it can be futile to
try to be convincing when they sit like this.
Not open to communicating
on any level
218

--- Page 213 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_213_00.jpeg]

How the Legs Reveal What the Mind Wants to Do
In business contexts, we have found that people sitting like this
talk in shorter sentences, reject more proposals and can recall
less detail of what was discussed than those who sit with their
arms and legs in an open position.
The American Figure Four
This position is a seated version of a Crotch Display as it high-
lights the genitals and is used by American males or any cultures
that are becoming 'Americanised', such as the youth of Singa-
pore, Japan and the Philippines. It shows that an argumentative
or competitive attitude exists. Monkeys and chimps also use
genital displays when they are being aggressive, because a good
display can avoid the damage that could be inflicted from a
physical fight. With all primates, the male with the most impres-
sive display is seen by the others as the winner. Places like
Australia and New Zealand use both European leg crossing and
the
 Figure Four.
 During the Second World War, the Nazis kept
a lookout for the Figure Four as anyone using it was clearly not
German or had spent time in the USA.
Ready to argue the point -
the American Figure Four
The Figure Four is still uncommon in Britain and Europe
among older people but is now seen in diverse cultures such as
Russia, Japan, Sardinia and Malta among the younger genera-
tions who are addicted to American films and television and
219

--- Page 214 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
are mirroring what they see. Men who sit like this are not only
perceived as being more dominant, they are also seen as relax-
ed and youthful. In parts of the Middle East and Asia however,
the Figure Four is seen as an insult because it shows the sole of
the shoe and that's the part that walks in dirt.
Women who wear trousers or jeans can sometimes be seen
sitting in the Figure Four position, but they usually do it only
around other women, not men, as they don't want to appear
too masculine or to signal sexual availability.
Studies also show that most people make most of their final
decision to do something when both feet are on the ground, so
the Figure Four is not conducive to asking someone to make a
decision.
When the Body Closes, so Does the Mind
We attended a conference where the audience was split 50/50
male and female and was comprised of about 100 managers
and 500 salespeople. A controversial issue was being discussed
- the treatment of salespeople by corporations. A well-known
speaker who was head of the salespersons' association was
asked to address the group. As he took the stage almost all the
male managers and around 25% of the female managers took
the defensive Arms-and-Legs-Crossed position, revealing how
threatened they felt by what they thought he would say. Their
fears were well founded. He raged about the poor quality of
management and how this was a major contributing factor to
the industry's staffing problems. Throughout his speech, most
salespeople in the audience were either leaning forward
showing interest or using evaluation gestures, but the man-
agers held their defensive position.
When
 the mind closes,
the body follows.
220

--- Page 215 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_215_00.jpeg]

How the Legs Reveal What the Mind Wants to Do
The salesperson then discussed what he believed the manager's
role should be, relative to salespeople. Almost as if they were
players in an orchestra who had been given a command by the
orchestra leader, most of the male managers shifted to the
Figure Four position. They were now mentally debating the
salesperson's point of view and many later confirmed that this
had been the case. We noticed that some managers had not
changed their posture. Even though most had also disagreed
with the speaker's views, some were unable to take the Figure
Four because of physical or medical conditions such as being
overweight, having leg problems or arthritis.
If you're trying to persuade someone who sits in any of these
positions you should attempt to get them to uncross before
continuing. If you have something to show, invite them to sit
beside you or give them things to do or to hold so that they lean
forward to write notes or hold brochures and samples. Offer-
ing tea or coffee also works well as it makes it hard for a person
to cross their arms and legs without burning themself.
Figure Four Leg Clamp
Not only does this person have a competitive attitude, they lock
the Figure Four into a permanent position using one or both
hands as a clamp. This is a sign of the tough-minded, stubborn
individual who rejects any opinion other than their own.
The Leg Clamp - locking a
competitive attitude into place
221

--- Page 216 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_216_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_216_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
The Ankle Lock
The male version of the
 Ankle Lock
 is often combined with
clenched fists resting on the knees or with the hands tightly
gripping the arms of the chair and a seated Crotch Display (see
below). The female version varies slightly: the knees are held
together, the feet may be to one side and the hands rest side by
side or one on top of the other resting on the upper legs.
The Ankle Lock: A woman minimising her leg space
and a man taking up more space
Over three decades of interviewing and selling to people, we
have noted that when an interviewee locks his ankles, he is
mentally 'biting his lip'. The gesture shows that he is holding
back a negative emotion, uncertainty or fear. The feet are
usually withdrawn under the chair, showing that the person
also has a withdrawn attitude. When people are
 involved
 in a
conversation, they also put their feet
 into
 the conversation.
Our work with lawyers showed that defendants who sat
outside the courtroom just prior to a hearing were three times
more likely than the plaintiffs to have their ankles tightly
locked under their chairs as they tried to control their emo-
tional state. Our study of 319 dental patients showed that 88 %
222

--- Page 217 ---

How the Legs Reveal What the Mind Wants to Do
locked their ankles as soon as they sat in the dental chair to
have work done. Patients who were only having a check-up
locked their ankles 68% of the time compared to 98% who
locked ankles when the dentist administered an injection.
More people lock their ankles with
the taxman than with the dentist.
Our work with law enforcement and government bodies, such
as the police, customs and the tax office, showed that most
people who were being interviewed locked their ankles at the
beginning of the interviews, but this was just as likely to be
from fear as out of guilt.
We also analysed the human resources profession and found
that most interviewees lock their ankles at some point during
an interview, indicating that they were holding back an
emotion or attitude. Nierenberg and Calero found that when
one party locked his ankles during a negotiation it often meant
that he was holding back a valuable concession. They found
that by using questioning techniques they could often encour-
age him to unlock his ankles and reveal the concession.
Asking positive questions about their feelings
can often get others to unlock their ankles.
In the initial stages of studying the Ankle Lock, we found that
asking questions was reasonably successful (42%) in getting
interviewees to relax and unlock their ankles. We discovered,
however, that if an interviewer walks around to the intervie-
wee's side of the desk and sits beside him, removing the desk
as a barrier, the interviewee would often relax and unlock his
ankles and the conversation would take on an open, more per-
sonal tone.
We were advising a company on effective customer tele-
phone contact when we met a man who had the unenviable job
223

--- Page 218 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
of customer debt collection. We watched him make a number
of calls and although he sounded relaxed, we noticed that,
when he talked with customers, his ankles were continually
locked together beneath his chair, but he didn't do this when
he was talking with us. When asked 'How do you enjoy this
work?', he replied, 'Fine! It's a lot of fun.' The verbal state-
ment was inconsistent, however, with his non-verbal signals,
although he did look and sound convincing. 'Are you sure?' we
asked. He paused for a moment, unlocked his ankles and, with
open palms, said, 'Well, actually, it drives me crazy!' He said
that he receives several calls each day from customers who are
rude or aggressive and he practised holding back his feelings in
order not to communicate them to customers. We also
recorded that salespeople who don't enjoy using the telephone
commonly sit in the Ankle Lock position.
The Short Skirt Syndrome
Women who wear mini-skirts cross their legs and ankles for
obvious, necessary reasons. Through years of habit, however,
many older women still sit in this position, which can not only
make them feel restrained, but others are likely to uncon-
sciously read it as negative and react towards these women
with caution.
Mini-skirts can give a woman the
appearance that she's not approachable.
Some people will still claim they sit in the Ankle Lock posi-
tion, or for that matter any negative arm and leg position,
because they feel 'comfortable'. If you are in this category,
remember that any arm or leg position will feel comfortable
when you hold a defensive, negative or reserved attitude.
A negative gesture can increase or prolong a negative atti-
224

--- Page 219 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_219_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_219_01.jpeg]

How the Legs Reveal What the Mind Wants to Do
tilde, and other people will read you as being apprehensive,
defensive or non-participant. Practise using positive and open
gestures; this will improve your self-confidence and others will
perceive you in a more positive way.
The Leg Twine
This gesture is almost exclusively used by women and is a
trademark of shy and timid women and part-time contortion-
ists. The top of one foot locks around the other leg to reinforce
an insecure attitude and shows she has retreated into her shell
like a tortoise, despite how relaxed her upper body may
appear. A warm, friendly, low-key approach is needed if you
eventually hope to open this clam.
Shy, timid people use the Leg Twine
Parallel-Legs
Because of the bone configuration of female legs and hips,
most men can't sit like this so it becomes a powerful signal of
femininity. Not surprisingly, over 86% of male participants in
our leg rating surveys voted this the most attractive female
sitting position.
225

--- Page 220 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_220_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Men voted Parallel-Legs as their number one favourite
position in women who are seated
One leg presses against the other and gives the legs a healthier,
more youthful look, which appeals to men from a reproductive
standpoint. This is the position taught to women in deport-
ment and modelling classes. This position should not be
confused with the woman who constantly crosses and
uncrosses her legs when she's with a man she fancies - this is
done to draw attention to her legs.
Put Your Right Foot In, Put Your Right Foot Out
When we're interested in either a conversation or a person, we
put one foot forward to shorten the distance between us and
that person. If we're reticent or not interested, we put our feet
back, usually under a chair if seated.
226

--- Page 221 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_221_00.jpeg]

How the Legs Reveal What the Mind Wants to Do
He's coming on strong with
One-Foot-Forward and Crotch
Display; she's either undecided
or not keen
In the above scene, the man is trying to show interest in the
woman by using typical male courtship body language: foot
forward, legs apart, Crotch Display and Arms-Splayed to try
to enlarge his overall perceived size and take up more space.
She's also using typical female no-go body language: legs
together, body facing away, arms folded and minimising the
amount of space she occupies. He's probably wasting his time.
Summary
Our feet tell others where we want to go and who we do or
don't like. If you are a woman, avoid crossing your legs when
you're sitting with businessmen unless you are wearing an A-
line dress or at least one that is below the knee-line. The sight
of a woman's thighs is distracting to almost all men and
detracts from her message. They'll remember who she was but
won't remember much of what she had to say. Many women
Wear shorter dresses in business because this appearance is
continually thrust at them by the media; over 90% of all
female television hosts are presented with short dresses and
exposed legs. This is because studies prove that male viewers
Will watch the programme for longer, but the same studies also
2 2 7

--- Page 222 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
show that the more leg a woman shows, the less men can
remember the content of what she said. The rule here is simple
— for social contexts, exposed crossed legs are fine but don't do
it in business. If you're a man dealing with women in business
the same rule applies - keep your knees together.
228

--- Page 223 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_223_00.jpeg]

Chapter11
THE 13 MOST
COMMON GESTURES
YOU'LL SEE DAILY
The number one gesture cluster women
can't tolerate men doing at work
People rarely think consciously about the effect of many of the
seemingly simple non-verbal things they do. For example,
when one person hugs another, most observers silently assume
that the back patting that occurs towards the end of the hug is
a gesture of affection and that the air kisses made - the sound
made on the side of someone's cheek - is also affection. The
reality is that the pat is used in the same way professional
wrestlers use it - to tell the other person to end the hug and
break the clinch. If you are really not too keen about hugging
someone but are forced into it because the people ahead of you
did it, you're likely to begin the back patting in the air even
before the hug begins. The air kiss - with its accompanying
sound - is given as a displacement of a real kiss that we don't
want to give either.
229

--- Page 224 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_224_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Most people use the Shoulder Tap to
break a clinch - sincere huggers hold
on tight. While she was holding
firmly, he was tapping rapidly
This chapter covers some of
the most common head ges-
tures 
and 
body 
language
clusters you are likely to see in
your day-to-day dealings with
others.
The Head Nod
In most cultures the
 Head Nod
 is used to signify 'Yes' or agree-
ment. It's a stunted form of bowing - the person symbolically
goes to bow but stops short, resulting in a nod. Bowing is a
submissive gesture so the Head Nod shows we are going along
with the other person's point of view. Research conducted
with people who were born deaf, dumb and blind shows that
they also use this gesture to signify 'Yes', so it appears to be an
inborn gesture of submission.
In India, the head is rocked from side to side, called the
Head Wobble,
 to signal 'Yes'. This is confusing for Westerners
and Europeans, who use this gesture to communicate 'Maybe
yes - maybe no'. As we've already said, in Japan, head nodding
doesn't necessarily mean 'Yes, I agree' - it usually means 'Yes
I hear you.'
Head nodding has its origins in
bowing to appear subordinate.
In Arab countries they use a single, upward head movement,
which means 'no' while Bulgarians use the common 'no
gesture to mean 'yes'
230

--- Page 225 ---

The 13 Most Common Gestures You'll See Daily
Why You Should Learn to Nod
Most people have never considered the power of head nodding
as a persuasion tool. Research shows that people will talk
three to four times more than usual when the listener nods
their head using groups of three nods at regular intervals. The
speed of the nod signals the patience - or lack of patience - of
the listener. Slow nodding communicates that the listener is
interested in what the speaker is saying so give slow, deliberate
clusters of three head nods when the other person is making a
point. Fast nodding tells the speaker you've heard enough or
that you want them to finish or give you a turn to speak.
How to Encourage Agreement
There are two powerful uses of the Head Nod. Body language
is an unconscious outward reflection of inner feelings so, if
you feel positive or affirmative, your head will begin to nod as
you speak. Conversely, if you simply start nodding your head
intentionally, you will begin to experience positive feelings. In
other words, positive feelings cause the head to nod - and the
reverse is also true: nodding the head causes positive feelings.
It's cause and effect again.
Head nodding is also very contagious. If someone nods their
head at you, you will usually nod too — even if you don't neces-
sarily agree with what they are saying. Head nodding is an
excellent tool for creating rapport, getting agreement and co-
operation. By finishing each sentence with a verbal affirmation
such as, 'Isn't it?', 'Wouldn't you?', 'Isn't that true?' or 'Fair
enough?', and with the speaker and listener both nodding their
heads, the listener experiences positive feelings which create a
greater likelihood of getting them to agree with you.
Head nodding encourages
co-operation and agreement.
231

--- Page 226 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
After you've asked a question and the listener gives his answer
nod your head during his answer. When he finishes speaking
continue
 to nod your head
 another five times
 at the rate of
about one nod per second. Usually, by the time you have
counted to four, the listener will begin speaking again and give
you more information. And as long as you nod and stay silent
with your hand on your chin in an Evaluation position, there's
no pressure on you to speak and you won't come across like an
interrogator. When you listen, put your hand on your chin and
give it light strokes because, as previously stated, research
shows that this encourages others to keep talking.
The Head Shake
Research also indicates that the
 Head Shake,
 usually meaning
'No', may also be an inborn action and evolutionary biologists
believe that it's the first gesture humans learn. This theory says
that when the newborn baby has had enough milk, it shakes its
head from side to side to reject its mother's breast. Similarly, a
child who has had enough to eat uses the Head Shake to reject
attempts to spoon feed him.
Shaking the head owes its origin to breastfeeding.
When someone is trying to convince you, watch if they use the
Head Shake gesture while saying they agree. The person who
says, 'I can see your point of view', or, 'It sounds good', or,
'We'll definitely do business', while shaking his head from side
to side might sound convincing, but the Head Shake gesture
signals a negative attitude and you would be well advised to be
sceptical about it.
No woman believes a man who says 'I love you' while
shaking his head. When Bill Clinton uttered his famous
phrase, 'I did not have sex with that woman' during the
Monica Lewinsky inquest, he did not use a Head Shake.
2 3 2

--- Page 227 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_227_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_227_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_227_02.jpeg]

The neutral
head position
The 13 Most Common Gestures You'll See Daily
The Basic Head Positions
1. Head Up
There are three basic head positions. The first
is with
 Head Up
 and is the position taken by
the person who
has a neutral atti-
tude about what
is being said. The
head remains still
and the conversa-
tion may be punctuated by
occasional small nods. Hand-to-
cheek evaluation gestures are
often used with this position.
When the head is lifted high with
the chin jutting forward it signals
superiority, fearlessness or arro-
gance. The person intentionally
exposes their throat and they gain
additional height which allows
them to 'look down their nose' at you. Large chins are the result
of high testosterone levels which is why chin-jutting is associated
with power and aggression.
2.The Head Tilt
Tilting the head to the side is a submission signal because it
exposes the throat and neck and makes the person look
smaller and less threatening. Its probable origin is in the baby
resting its head on its parent's shoulder or chest, and the sub-
missive, non-threatening meaning it conveys
seems to be unconsciously understood by
most people, especially women.
The Head Tilt displays the vulnerable
neck and makes a person appear smaller
and more submissive
Margaret Thatcher using
her defiant Chin Thrust
233

--- Page 228 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_228_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Charles Darwin was one of the first to note that humans, as
well as animals - especially dogs - tilt their heads to one side
when they become interested in something. Women will use
this gesture to show interest in men they fancy because a
woman who is non-
threatening and shows
submission is attractive
to most men.
Studies of paintings
from the last two thou-
sand years show that
women are depicted three
times as often as men
using the
 Head-Tilt
 and
women are shown in
advertisements 
tilting
their heads three times as
often as men. This shows
how most people under-
stand, on an intuitive
level, that displaying the
neck shows submission.
In a business negotia-
tions with men, however,
a woman should keep her head up at all times.
If you are giving a presentation or delivering a speech, make
a point of looking for this gesture among your audience. When
you see an audience tilting their heads and leaning forward
using hand-to-chin evaluation gestures, you're getting the
point across. When you listen to others, use the Head-Tilt and
Head Nods and the listener will begin to feel trusting towards
you because you appear non-threatening.
3. Head Down
When the chin is down, it signals that a negative, judgemental
or aggressive attitude exists. Critical evaluation clusters are
normally made with the head down and until the person's
234
Tilting the head to reveal the vulnerable
neck appears to be intuitively understood
by most people

--- Page 229 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_229_00.jpeg]

The 13 Most Common Gestures You'll See Daily
Head Down
shows disapproval
or dejection
head lifts or tilts, you can have a problem,
professional presenters and trainers are
often confronted by audiences who are
seated with their heads down and arms
folded on their chests.
Experienced conference speakers and
presenters will take action to involve their
audience and get participation before they
begin their presentation. This is intended to
get the audience's heads up and to get involvement. If the
speaker's tactic is successful, the audience's next head position
will be the Head Tilt.
The English have a peculiar greeting gesture called the
 Head
Twist,
 which involves putting the head down while simultane-
ously twisting the head to one side. This comes from medieval
times when men would doff their hat as a form of greeting;
this evolved into just dipping the head and touching the hat,
which, in modern times, is now the Head Twist, the salute or
simply tapping the forehead when meeting someone.
The Head Shrug
Raising the shoulders and pulling the head down between
them lets a person protect the vulnerable neck and throat from
injury. It's the cluster used when a person hears a loud bang
behind them or if they think something will fall on them.
When it's used in a personal or business context it implies a
submissive apology, which detracts from any encounter where
you are trying to appear confident.
When someone walks past others who are talking, admiring
a view or listening to a speaker, they pull their head down,
turn their shoulders in and try to appear smaller and less sig-
nificant. This is known as the
 Head Duck.
 It is also used by
subordinates approaching superiors, and reveals the status and
Power play between individuals.
235

--- Page 230 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_230_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_230_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
The Head Duck — trying to
appear smaller in order
not to cause offence to others
Picking Imaginary Lint
When a person disapproves of the opinions or attitudes of
others but doesn't want to say anything, displacement gestures
are likely to occur, that is, apparently innocent body language
gestures that reveal a withheld opinion. Picking imaginary
pieces of lint from one's own clothing is one such gesture. The
Lint-Picker usually looks down and away from others while
performing this seemingly minor, irrelevant action. This is a
common signal of disapproval and is a good sign that he
doesn't like what's being said, even when he sounds as if he's
agreeing with everything.
The Lint-Picker has a
secret opinion and
prefers not to state it
Open your palms and say, 'What do you think?' or, 'I can see
you have some thoughts on this. Would you mind telling me
what they are?' Sit back, arms apart, palms visible, and wait for
the answer. If the person says he is in agreement with you but
236

--- Page 231 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_231_00.jpeg]

The 13 Most Common Gestures You'll See Daily
continues to pick the imaginary lint, you may need to take an
even more direct approach to discover his hidden objections.
How We Show We're Ready for Action
To appear bigger for fighting or courting rituals, birds will
fluff their feathers, fish can expand their body size by sucking
in water and cats or dogs make their fur stand on end. The
hairless human, however, no longer has a thick pelt to expand
to make himself look more imposing when he is fearful or
angry. When we describe a scary movie we often say, 'It made
my hair stand on end'; if we become angry with someone, 'He
made the hackles on my neck rise'; and when we are smitten
with someone, they can give us 'goose bumps'. All these are
the body's mechanical reactions to circumstances in which we
attempt to make ourselves appear larger and are caused by the
erector pillae muscles on the skin, which attempt to make our
non-existent pelt stand up. Modern humans, however, have
invented a gesture to help them achieve a bigger physical pres-
ence - the
 Hands-on-Hips
 gesture.
Elbows up and pointed shows readiness
to dominate; elbows in and head tilted show submission
Hands-on-Hips is used by the child arguing with its parent, the
athlete waiting for his event to begin, the boxer waiting for the
237

--- Page 232 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
bout to start and males who want to issue a non-verbal chal-
lenge to other males who enter their territory. In each instance
the person takes the Hands-on-Hips pose and this is a univer-
sal gesture used to communicate that a person is ready for
assertive action. It lets the person take up more space and has
the threat value of the pointed elbows that act as weapons,
preventing others from approaching or passing. The arms
being half raised show readiness for attack and this is the posi-
tion taken by cowboys in a gunfight. Even one hand on the hip
will send the intended message, particularly when it's pointed
at the intended victim. It's used everywhere and in the Philip-
pines and Malaysia it carries the even stronger message of
anger or outrage.
Also known as the 'readiness' gesture, that is, the person is
ready for assertive action, its basic meaning carries a subtly
aggressive attitude everywhere. It has also been called the
achiever stance, related to the goal-directed person who is
ready to tackle their objectives or is ready to take action on
something. Men often use this gesture around women to
display an assertive male attitude.
Hands-on-Hips makes you look bigger and more
noticeable because you take up more space.
It's important to consider the context and other body language
immediately preceding the Hands-on-Hips pose in order to
make an accurate assessment of the person's attitude. For
example, is the coat open and pushed back on to the hips, or
is it buttoned when the aggressive pose is taken?
 Closed-Coat-
Readiness
 shows frustration, whereas coat open and pushed
back is directly aggressive because the person is openly expos-
ing their front in a display of fearlessness. This position is
further reinforced by placing the feet evenly apart on the
ground or by adding clenched fists to the gesture cluster.
238

--- Page 233 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_233_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_233_01.jpeg]

The 13 Most Common Gestures You'll See Daily
Hands-on-Hips used by
models to make clothing
more appealing
These aggressive-readiness clusters are used by professional
models to give the impression that their clothing is for the
modern, assertive, forward-thinking woman. Occasionally the
gesture may be done with only one hand on the hip and the
other displaying another gesture and this is commonly used by
women who want to draw attention to themselves by using this
cluster with a pelvic tilt to emphasise their hips-to-waist ratio,
which indicates fertility. Hands-on-Hips is regularly used by
both men and women in courtship to draw attention to them-
selves.
The Cowboy Stance
Thumbs tucked into the belt or into the tops of
the pockets, frames the genital area and is a
display used mainly by men to show a sexually
aggressive attitude. It is the most common
gesture used in television Westerns to show
viewers the virility of their favourite gun-
slinger.
Also jokingly called the
 Man-of-the-Long-
Thumbs
 gesture, the arms take the readiness
The cowboy stance - his fingers point
at what he wants you to notice
239

--- Page 234 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_234_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
position and the hands serve as central indicators, highlighting
the crotch. Men use this gesture to stake their territory or to
show other men that they are unafraid. Apes use the same
gesture, but without a belt or trousers.
This gesture tells others, 'I am virile -1 can dominate' which
is why it's a regular for men on the prowl. Any man talking to
a woman while he's standing like this - with dilated pupils and
one foot pointing towards her — is easily read by most women.
It's one of the gestures that gives the game away for most men,
as they unwittingly declare to her what's on their mind.
The sexually assertive female
This gesture is principally used by men, but women wearing
jeans and trousers can occasionally be seen doing it too. When
wearing dresses or skirts, the sexually assertive female displays
one or both thumbs tucked into a belt or pocket.
Sizing Up the Competition
The next illustration shows two men sizing each other up,
using the characteristic Hands-on-Hips and
 Tbumbs-in-Belt
gestures. Considering that they are both turned at an angle
away from each other and the lower halves of their bodies
appear relaxed, it's reasonable to assume that they are uncon-
sciously evaluating each other and that confrontation is
unlikely.
240

--- Page 235 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_235_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_235_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_235_02.jpeg]

The 13 Most Common Gestures You'll See Daily
Sizing up the
competition
Their conversation may sound casual or friendly but a relaxed
atmosphere won't exist until their Hands-on-Hips gestures are
dropped and open gestures or head tilting are used.
If these two men were directly facing each other with their
feet planted firmly on the ground and legs apart, a fight could
be likely.
Gesture clusters show
aggressive attitudes
Even though Adolf Hitler used the Hands-on-Hips gesture to
try to appear authoritative for publicity photographs he still
could not stop his left hand from crossing his body and
attempting to cover his solitary testicle.
241

--- Page 236 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_236_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Contradictory signals: his right arm
shows pointed aggression while his left
hand attempts to protect his front
The Legs-Spread
This is almost entirely a male gesture and is also seen among
apes who are trying to establish authority over other apes.
Rather than risk injury fighting, they spread their legs and the
one with the biggest display is seen as the most dominant. And
so it is with male humans; even though it's usually done
unconsciously, it sends a powerful message. If one man does
the
 Legs-Spread
 the others usually mirror to maintain status
but it has very negative effects when a man uses it in front of
women, especially in a business context, because she can't
mirror it.
A woman will feel intimidated by a man
who uses the Legs-Spread in business situations.
Our videotaped meetings reveal that many women respond by
crossing their legs and arms, which immediately puts them on
the defensive. The advice for men here is clear — keep your legs
together in business meetings. If you're a woman who is con-
stantly confronted by a crotch-displaying male, don't react
when he does it. It can work against you only if you respond
242

--- Page 237 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_237_00.jpeg]

The 13 Most Common Gestures You'll See Daily
defensively. Instead, try talking to his crotch — responses such
as 'You've got a good point there, Bob' and 'I can see where
you're coming from' can teach a valuable lesson as well as
causing riotous laughter when used at the right time.
Leg-Over-the-Arm-of-Chair
This is mainly done by men because it also uses the Legs-
Spread. It not only signifies the man's ownership of the chair,
it also signals that he has an informal, aggressive attitude.
Informality, indifference
and lack of concern
It is common to see two male friends laughing and joking with
each other while sitting this way, but let's consider its impact in
different circumstances. Let's say an employee has a personal
problem and goes to ask his boss for advice. As the employee
explains, he leans forward in the chair, his hands on his knees,
his head down, with a dejected expression and voice lowered.
The boss listens, sitting motionless, then leans back in his chair
and puts one leg over the arm. The boss's attitude has now
changed to lack of concern or indifference. In other words, he
has little concern for the employee or his problem and he may
even feel that his time is being wasted with the 'same old story'.
So what was the boss indifferent about? He may have consid-
ered the employee's problem, decided that it's not much of a
problem anyway and become disinterested. He may even tell his
employee not to worry and that the problem will simply go away
243

--- Page 238 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_238_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
As long as the boss's leg stays over the arm of the chair, his indif-
ferent attitude will persist. When the employee leaves the office,
the boss breathes a sigh of relief and says to himself, 'Thank
heavens he's gone!' and takes his leg off the arm of the chair.
The
 Leg-Over-the-Arm-of-Chair
 can be annoying when it
occurs during negotiation, and it is vital to make that person
change position because the longer he stays in it, the longer he
will have an indifferent or aggressive attitude. An easy way to
do this is to ask him to lean across and look at something, or,
if you have a wicked sense of humour, tell him there's a split in
his trousers.
Straddling a Chair
Centuries ago, men used shields to protect themselves from the
spears and clubs of the enemy, and today, civilised man uses
whatever he has at his disposal to symbolise this same protec-
tive behaviour when he is under physical or verbal attack. This
includes standing behind a gate, doorway, fence, desk or the
open door of his motor vehicle and straddling a chair.
The Straddler wants to
dominate or control while,
at the same time, protecting
his front
The back of the chair acts as a shield to protect the body and
can transform a person into an aggressive, dominant person-
ality. Men also have their legs spread in a wide Crotch Display,
adding male assertion to the position. Most Straddlers are
dominant types who will try to take control of others when
they become bored with the conversation, and the back of the
244

--- Page 239 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_239_00.jpeg]

The 13 Most Common Gestures You'll See Daily
chair serves as good protection from any 'attack' by other
members of the group. The Straddler is often discreet and can
slip into the straddle position almost unnoticed.
The easiest way to disarm the Straddler is to stand up or sit
behind him, making him feel vulnerable to attack and forcing
him to change his position. This can work well in a group sit-
uation because the Straddler will have his back exposed and
this compels him to change to another position.
So what would you do with a Straddler on a swivel chair? It is
pointless to try to reason with a crotch-displaying man on a
merry-go-round, so the best defence is non-verbal. Conduct your
conversation standing up and looking down on the Straddler, and
move into his Personal Space. This is unnerving for him and he
can even fall backwards off his chair in an attempt to move away.
Next time you have a Straddler coming to visit you, be sure
to seat him on a fixed chair that has arms to stop him from
taking his favourite position. When he can't straddle, his usual
next move is to use the
 Catapult.
The Catapult
This is a seated version of the Hands-on-Hips pose except the
hands are behind the head with the elbows menacingly
pointed out. Again, it's almost entirely a male gesture used to
intimidate others or it infers a relaxed attitude to lull you into
a false sense of security just before he ambushes you.
The Catapult:
cool, confident,
knows it all and
thinks he has
more bananas
than anyone
245

--- Page 240 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
This gesture is typical of professionals such as accountants
lawyers, sales managers or people who are feeling superior
dominant or confident about something. If we could read this
person's mind, he would be saying things such as, 'I have all
the answers', or 'Everything's under control', or even 'Maybe
one day you'll be as smart as me'. Management personnel reg-
ularly use it and newly appointed male managers suddenly
begin to use it, despite the fact that they seldom used it prior
to their promotion. It is also used by 'Know-It-All' individuals
and it intimidates most people. It's the trademark gesture of
men who like you to realise just how knowledgeable they are.
It can also be used as a territorial sign to show that the person
has staked a claim to that particular area.
It is usually clustered with a Figure-Four leg position or
Crotch Display, which shows that he not only feels superior,
he's also likely to argue or try to dominate. There are several
ways you can deal with this gesture, depending on the circum-
stances. You can lean forward with palms up and say, 'I can see
that you know about this. Would you care to comment?' then
sit back and wait for an answer.
Women quickly develop a dislike for men who
use the Catapult in business meetings.
You could place something just out of his reach and ask, 'Have
you seen this?', forcing him to lean forward. If you are a man,
copying the gesture can be a simple way to handle the Cata-
pulter because mirroring creates equality. This doesn't work
for a woman however, because it puts her breasts on display,
leaving her at a disadvantage. Even flat-chested women who
attempt the
 Catapult are
 described as aggressive by both men
and women.
The Catapult doesn't work for
women, even flat-chested ones.
246

--- Page 241 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_241_00.jpeg]

The classic position
showing readiness for
action
247
The 13 Most Common Gestures You'll See Daily
If you are a woman and a man does this, continue the conver-
sation standing up. This forces the Catapulter to change
position so he can continue the conversation. When he stops
the Catapult, sit down again. If he catapults again, stand up.
This is a non-aggressive way of training others not to try to
intimidate you. On the other hand, if the person using the Cat-
apult is your superior and is reprimanding you, you will
intimidate him by copying this gesture. For example, two
equals will use the Catapult in each other's presence to show
equality and agreement, but if a mischievous schoolboy did it,
it would infuriate the school principal.
In one insurance company, we found that 27 out of 30 male
sales managers used the Catapult regularly around their sales-
people or subordinates but rarely in the presence of their
superiors. When they were with their superiors, however, the
same managers were more likely to use submissive and subor-
dinate gesture clusters.
Gestures That Show When a Person is Ready
One of the most valuable gestures a negotiator can learn to
recognise is seated readiness. When you are presenting a pro-
posal, for example, if the other person were to take this
gesture at the end of the presentation, and the interview had
gone well up to that point, you could ask for agreement and
would be likely to get it.

--- Page 242 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_242_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_242_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Our video replays of salespeople interviewing potential buyers
revealed that, whenever the
 Seated Readiness
 gesture followed
a Chin-Stroke (decision-making), the client said 'yes' to the
proposal more than half the time. In contrast, if during the
close of the sale the client took the Arms-Crossed position
immediately after the Chin-Stroke, the sale was usually not
made. The Seated Readiness gesture can also be taken by the
angry person who is ready for something else - to throw you
out. The preceding gesture clusters indicate the person's real
intentions.
The Starter's Position
Readiness gestures that signal a desire to conclude a meeting
include leaning forward with both hands on both knees, or
leaning forward with both hands gripping the chair as if they
were at the start of a race. If either of these occur during a
conversation it would be wise for you to take the lead and
resell, change direction or terminate the conversation.
On your marks, get set: in the starting blocks -
readiness to end an encounter or a conversation
248

--- Page 243 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_243_00.jpeg]

The 13 Most Common Gestures You'll See Daily
Summary
The body language signals covered in this chapter are fairly
easy to observe because most involve big gestures. Not only is
it important to understand the significance of these signals,
it's vital to good communication that you eliminate any nega-
tive gestures from your own repertoire and practise using the
things that will give you positive results.
249

--- Page 244 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_244_00.jpeg]

Chapter 12
MIRRORING - HOW WE
BUILD RAPPORT
They all look the same, dress the same way, use the same facial expressions
and body language but each will tell you he's 'doing his own thing'
When we meet others for the first time, we need to assess
quickly whether they are positive or negative towards us, just
as most other animals do for survival reasons. We do this by
scanning the other person's body to see if they will move or
gesture the same way we do in what is known as 'mirroring'.
We mirror each other's body language as a way of bonding,
being accepted and creating rapport, but we are usually obliv-
ious to the fact that we are doing it. In ancient times, mirroring
was also a social device which helped our ancestors fit in suc-
cessfully with larger groups; it is also a left-over from a
primitive method of learning which involved imitation.
One of the most noticeable forms of mirroring is yawning -
one person starts and it sets everyone off. Robert Provine
found that yawning is so contagious you don't even need to see
another person yawn - the sight of a wide-open mouth is
enough to do it. It was once thought that the purpose of
250

--- Page 245 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_245_00.jpeg]

Mirroring
 -
 How We Build Rapport
yawning was to oxygenate the body but we now know that it's
a form of mirroring that serves to create rapport with others
and to avoid aggression — just as it also does for monkeys and
chimps.
Wearing the same outfit as another woman
is a mirroring no-no. But if two men show up
at a party wearing the same outfit, they
could become lifelong friends.
Non-verbally, mirroring says 'Look at me; I'm the same as you.
I feel the same way and share the same attitudes.' This is why
people at a rock concert will all jump to their feet and applaud
simultaneously or give a 'Mexican Wave' together. The syn-
chronicity of the crowd promotes a secure feeling in the
participants. Similarly, people in an angry mob will mirror
aggressive attitudes and this explains why many usually calm
people can lose their cool in this situation.
The urge to mirror is also the basis on which a queue works.
In a queue, people willingly co-operate with people they have
never met and will never see
again, obeying an unwritten
set of behavioural rules while
waiting for a bus, at an art
gallery, in a bank or side by
side in war. Professor Joseph
Heinrich from the University
of Michigan found that the
urges to mirror others are
hardwired 
into 
the 
brain
because co-operation leads to
more food, better health and
Learning to mirror our parents
begins early: Prince Philip and a
young Prince Charles in perfect step
251

--- Page 246 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
economic growth for communities. It also offers an explana-
tion as to why societies that are highly disciplined in
mirroring, such as the British, Germans and ancient Romans
successfully dominated the world for many years.
Mirroring makes others feel 'at ease'. It's such a powerful
rapport-building tool that slow-motion video research reveals
that it even extends to simultaneous blinking, nostril-flaring,
eyebrow-raising and even pupil dilation, which is remarkable
as these micro-gestures cannot be consciously imitated.
Creating the Right Vibes
Studies into synchronous body language behaviour show that
people who feel similar emotions, or are on the same wavelength
and are likely to be experiencing a rapport, will also begin to
match each other's body language and expressions. Being 'in
sync' to bond with another person begins early in the womb
when our body functions and heartbeat match the rhythm of our
mother, so mirroring is a state to which we are naturally inclined.
When a couple are in the early stages of courtship it's
common to see them behave with synchronous movements,
almost as if they are dancing. For example, when a woman
takes a mouthful of food the man wipes the corner of his
mouth; or he begins a sentence and she finishes it for him.
When she gets PMT, he develops a strong desire for chocolate;
and when she feels bloated, he farts.
When a person says 'the vibes are right' or that they 'feel
right' around another person, they are unknowingly referring
to mirroring and synchronous behaviour. For example, at a
restaurant, one person can be reluctant to eat or drink alone
for fear of being out of sync with the others. When it comes to
ordering the meal, each may check with the others before
ordering. 'What are you having?' they ask as they try to mirror
their meals. This is one of the reasons why playing back-
ground music during a date is so effective — the music gets a
couple to beat and tap in time together.
2 5 2

--- Page 247 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_247_00.jpeg]

Mirroring - How We Build Rapport
Mirroring the other person's body language and appearance
shows a united front and doesn't let either get one-up on the other
Mirroring on a Cellular Level
American heart surgeon, Dr Memhet Oz, reported some
remarkable findings from heart recipients. He found that, as
with most other body organs, the heart appears to retain cel-
lular memories, and this allows some patients to experience
some of the emotions experienced by the heart donor. Even
more remarkably, he found some recipients also assume the
same gestures and posture of the donor even though they have
never seen the donor. His conclusion was that it appears that
the heart cells instruct the recipient's brains to take on the
donor's body language. Conversely, people suffering from dis-
orders such as autism have no ability to mirror or match the
behaviour of others, which makes it difficult for two-way com-
munication with others. The same goes for drunk people
whose gestures are out of sync with their words, making it
impossible for any mirroring to occur.
Because of the phenomenon of cause and effect, if you
intentionally
 assume certain body language positions you will
begin to experience the emotions associated with those ges-
tures. For example, if you feel confident, you may
253

--- Page 248 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
unconsciously assume the Steeple gesture to reflect your confi-
dence, but if you intentionally Steeple you will not only begin
to feel more confident, others will perceive that you're confi-
dent. This, then, becomes a powerful way to create a rapport
with others by intentionally matching their body language and
posture.
Mirroring Differences Between Men and
Women
Geoffrey Beattie, at the University of Manchester, found that
a woman is instinctively four times more likely to mirror
another woman than a man is to mirror another man. He also
found that women mirror men's body language too, but men
are reluctant to mirror a woman's gestures or posture - unless
he is in courtship mode.
When a woman says she can 'see' that someone doesn't
agree with the group opinion she is actually 'seeing' the dis-
agreement. She's picked up that someone's body language is
out of sync with group opinion and they are showing their dis-
agreement by not mirroring the group's body language. How
women can 'see' disagreement, anger, lying or feeling hurt has
always been a source of amazement to most men. It's because
most men's brains are simply not well equipped to read the
fine detail of others' body language and don't consciously
notice mirroring discrepancies.
As we said in our book
 Why Men Don't Listen & Women
Can't Read Maps
 (Orion), men and women's brains are pro-
grammed differently to express emotions through facial
expressions and body language. Typically, a woman can use an
average of six main facial expressions in a ten-second listening
period to reflect and then feed back the speaker's emotions.
Her face will mirror the emotions being expressed by the
speaker. To someone watching, it can look as if the events
being discussed are happening to both women.
A woman reads the meaning of what is being said through
2 5 4

--- Page 249 ---

Mirroring — How We Build Rapport
the speaker's voice tone and his emotional condition through
his body language. This is exactly what a man needs to do to
capture a woman's attention and to keep her interested and lis-
tening. Most men are daunted by the prospect of using facial
feedback while listening, but it pays big dividends for the man
who becomes good at it.
Some men say 'She'll think I'm effeminate!', but research
with these techniques shows that when a man mirrors a
woman's facial expressions as she talks she will describe him
as caring, intelligent, interesting and attractive.
Men, on the other hand, can make fewer than a third of the
facial expressions a woman can make. Men usually hold
expressionless faces, especially in public, because of the evolu-
tionary need to withhold emotion to stave off possible attack
from strangers and to appear to be in control of their emo-
tions. This is why most men look as if they are statues when
they listen.
The emotionless mask that men wear while listening allows
them to feel in control of the situation, but does not mean men
don't experience emotions. Brain scans reveal that men can
feel emotion as strongly as women, but avoid showing it pub-
licly.
What to Do About It if You're Female
The key to mirroring a man's behaviour is in understanding
that he doesn't use his face to signal his attitudes - he uses his
body. Most women find it difficult to mirror an expressionless
man but with males this is not required. If you're a woman, it
means that you need to reduce your facial expressions so that
you don't come across as overwhelming or intimidating. Most
importantly, don't mirror what you think he
 might
 be feeling.
That can be disastrous if you've got it wrong and you may be
described as 'dizzy' or 'scatterbrained'. Women in business
who listen with a more serious face are described by men as
more intelligent, astute and sensible.
2 5 5

--- Page 250 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_250_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
When Men and Women Start to Look Alike
When two people live together for a long time and have a good
working relationship, they often begin to look alike. This is
because they are constantly mirroring each other's facial
expressions, which, over time, builds muscle definition in the
same areas of the face. Even couples who don't look facially
similar can appear similar in a photograph because they use
the same smile.
The Beckhams don't look at
all alike until they smile
Forty years of mirroring -
the Beckhams at retirement
with their dog, Spot
In 2000, psychologist Dr John Gottman of the University of
Washington, Seattle, and his colleagues, discovered that mar-
riages are more likely to fail when one partner not only does
not mirror the other's expressions of happiness, but instead
shows expressions of contempt. Instead, this opposite behav-
iour affects the smiling partner, even when they are not
consciously aware of what is happening.
Do We Resemble Our Pets?
You can also see mirroring occur in the pets some people choose.
Without realising it, we unconsciously tend to favour pets that
256

--- Page 251 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_251_00.jpeg]

Mirroring - How We Build Rapport
physically resemble us, or that appear to reflect our attitudes.
To demonstrate the point, here are a few examples:
Do we choose pets that resemble us?
Monkey See, Monkey Do
The next time you attend a social function or go to a place
where people meet and interact, notice the number of people
who have taken the identical gestures and posture of the
person with whom they're talking. Mirroring is the way one
2 5 7

--- Page 252 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_252_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_252_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
person tells another that he is in agreement with his ideas and
attitudes. One is non-verbally saying to the other, 'As you can
see, I think the same as you.' The person with the highest
status often makes the first moves and the others copy, usually
in pecking order.
Thinking alike
Take, for example, the two men standing at the bar in the
above illustration. They are mirroring so it's reasonable to
assume that they are discussing a topic on which they have
similar thoughts and feelings. If one man uses an evaluation
gesture or stands on the other foot, the other will copy. One
puts a hand in his pocket, the other copies again. Mirroring
will continue for as long as the two are in agreement.
Even when Presidents Bush and Chirac disagree verbally, they still
usually mirror each other - this shows they have mutual respect
258

--- Page 253 ---

Mirroring
 -
 How We Build Rapport
Mirroring happens among friends or between people of the
same status and it is common to see married couples walk,
stand, sit and move in identical ways. Albert Scheflen found
that people who are strangers studiously
 avoid
 holding mirror
positions.
Matching Voices
Intonation, voice inflection, speed of speaking and even
accents also synchronise during the mirroring process to
further establish mutual attitudes and build rapport. This is
known as 'pacing' and it can almost seem as if the two people
are singing in tune. You will often see a speaker beating time
with his hands while the listener matches the rhythm with
head nods. As a relationship grows over time, the mirroring of
the main body language positions becomes less as each person
begins to anticipate the other's attitudes, and vocal pacing
with the other person becomes a main medium for maintain-
ing rapport.
Never speak at a faster rate than the other person. Studies
reveal that others describe feeling 'pressured' when someone
speaks more quickly than they do. A person's speed of speech
shows the rate at which their brain can consciously analyse
information. Speak at the same rate or slightly slower than the
other person and mirror their inflection and intonation.
Pacing is critical when attempting to make appointments by
telephone because voice is your only communication medium.
Intentionally Creating Rapport
The significance of mirroring is one of the most important
body language lessons you can learn because it's a clear way in
which others tell us that they agree with us or like us. It is also
a way for us to tell others that we like them, by simply mirror-
ing their body language.
2 5 9

--- Page 254 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_254_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_254_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
If a boss wants to develop a rapport and create a relaxed
atmosphere with a nervous employee, he could copy the
employee's posture to achieve this end. Similarly, an up-and-
coming employee may be seen copying his boss's gestures in an
attempt to show agreement when the boss is giving his
opinion. Using this knowledge, it is possible to influence
others by mirroring their positive gestures and posture. This
has the effect of putting the other person in a receptive and
relaxed frame of mind, because he can 'see' that you under-
stand his point of view.
Mirroring the other
person's body language
to gain acceptance
Before you mirror someone's body language, however, you must
take into consideration your relationship with that person. Let's
say, for example, the junior employee of a corporation has asked
for a pay rise and is called into the manager's office. The
employee enters the manager's office, the manager asks him to
sit down and assumes the Catapult with a Figure-Four showing
the employee a superior, dominant attitude. But what would
happen if the junior then copied the manager's dominant body
language while discussing the potential salary rise?
A boss would perceive a
subordinate's mirroring
behaviour as arrogance
260

--- Page 255 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_255_00.jpeg]

Mirroring - How We Build Rapport
Even if the employee's talk was on a subordinate level, the
manager could feel affronted by the employee's body lan-
guage and his job could be in jeopardy. Mirroring is also
effective for intimidating or disarming 'superior' types who
try to take control. Accountants, lawyers and managers are
notorious for using superiority body language clusters around
people they consider inferior. By mirroring, you can disconcert
them and force a change of position. But never do it to
the boss.
They have the same posture and body language and
the close distance between them shows they are friends
going about business in the same way with similar goals.
Who Mirrors Whom?
Research shows that when the leader of a group assumes certain
gestures and positions, subordinates will copy, usually in
pecking order. Leaders also tend to be the first of a group to
walk through a doorway and they like to sit on the end of a sofa,
table or bench seat rather than in the centre. When a group of
executives walks into a room, the person with the highest status
usually goes first. When executives are seated in the boardroom,
261

--- Page 256 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_256_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
the boss usually sits at the head of the table, often furthest from
the door. If the boss sits in the Catapult, his subordinates are
likely to copy in order of their importance within the group
You can see this in a meeting where people 'take sides' with
others by mirroring their body language. This lets you see who
will vote with you and who will vote against you.
Mirroring is a good strategy to use if you are part of a pres-
entation team. Decide, in advance, that when the team
spokesperson makes a gesture or takes a posture when speak-
ing, the entire team will mirror. This not only gives your team
the powerful appearance of being cohesive, it can frighten the
hell out of competitors who suspect something is up, even
though they can't quite figure out what it is.
When presenting ideas, products and services to couples,
watching who mirrors whom reveals where the ultimate power
or final decision-making ability lies. If the woman makes the
initial movements, however small, such as crossing her feet,
lacing her fingers or using a Critical Evaluation cluster and the
man copies, there is little point in asking him for a decision -
he doesn't have the authority to make it.
262
Bill Clinton may have been the world's most powerful
man but when Hillary gestured, he copied - and when
they walk hand-in-hand, she often has the front-hold position

--- Page 257 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_257_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_257_01.jpeg]

Mirroring
 -
 How We Build Rapport
Summary
Mirroring someone's body language makes them feel accepted
and creates a bond and is a phenomenon that occurs naturally
between friends and people of equal status. Conversely, we
make a point of not mirroring those we don't like or strangers,
such as those riding with us in a lift or standing in the queue
at the cinema.
Mirroring the other person's body language and speech pat-
terns is one of the most powerful ways to build rapport
quickly. In a new meeting with someone, mirror his seating
position, posture, body angle, gestures, expressions and tone
of voice. Before long, they'll start to feel that there's something
about you they like - they'll describe you as 'easy to be with'.
This is because they see themselves reflected in you. A word of
Warning, however: don't do it too early in a new encounter as
many people have become aware of mirroring strategies since
263
Walking in step - Charles leads, Camilla follows slightly behind;
after the beginning of the Iraqi conflict in 2003, Tony Blair began
to mirror George Bush's Thumbs-in-Belt gesture

--- Page 258 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
our original book
 Body Language
 was published and over 100
million people watched the television series that followed.
When someone takes a position you have one of three choices
- ignore it, do something else or mirror it. Mirroring pays big
dividends. But never mirror a person's negative signals.
2 6 4

--- Page 259 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_259_00.jpeg]

Chapter 13
THE SECRET SIGNALS
OF CIGARETTES,
GLASSES AND MAKE-UP
Smoking is an outward signal of inner turmoil or conflict and
most smoking has less to do with nicotine addiction and more
to do with the need for reassurance. It is one of the displace-
ment activities that people use in today's high-pressure society
to release the tensions that build up from social and business
encounters. For example, most people experience inner
tension while waiting outside the dentist's surgery to have a
tooth removed. While a smoker might cover up his anxiety by
sneaking out for a smoke, non-smokers perform other rituals
such as grooming, gum-chewing, nail-biting, finger-and foot-
tapping, cufflink-adjusting, head-scratching, playing with
something, or other gestures that tell us they need reassurance.
Jewellery is also popular for exactly the same reason - it has
265

--- Page 260 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
high fondle value and allows its owner to displace their inse-
curity, fear, impatience or lack of confidence onto the item.
Studies now show a clear relationship between whether an
infant was breast-fed and its likelihood of becoming a smoker
as an adult. It was found that babies who were largely bottle-
fed represent the majority of adult smokers and the heaviest
smokers, while the longer a baby was breast-fed, the less
chance there was that it would become a smoker. It seems that
breast-fed babies receive comfort and bonding from the breast
that is unattainable from a bottle, the consequence being that
the bottle-fed babies, as adults, continue the search for
comfort by sucking things. Smokers use their cigarettes for the
same reason as the child who sucks his blanket or thumb.
Bottle-fed babies are three times more likely
to become smokers than breast-fed babies.
Not only were smokers three times more likely to have been
thumb-suckers as children, they have also been shown to be
more neurotic than non-smokers and to experience oral fixa-
tions such as sucking the arm of their glasses, nail-biting,
pen-munching, lip-biting and enough pencil-chewing to
embarrass an average beaver. Clearly, many desires, including
the urge to suck and feel secure, were satisfied in breast-fed
babies but not in bottle-fed babies.
The Two Types of Smokers
There are two basic types of smokers - addicted smokers and
social smokers.
Studies show that smaller, quicker puffs on a cigarette stim-
ulate the brain, giving a heightened level of awareness whereas
longer, slower puffs act as a sedative. Addicted smokers are
dependent on the sedative effects of nicotine to help them deal
with stress and they take longer, deeper puffs and will also
266

--- Page 261 ---

The Secret Signals of Cigarettes, Glasses and Make-up
smoke alone. Social smokers usually smoke only in the pres-
ence of others or 'when I have a few drinks'. This means that
this smoking is a social display to create certain impressions
on others. In social smoking, from the time the cigarette is lit
until it's extinguished it's being smoked for only 20% of the
time in shorter, quicker puffs while the other 80% is devoted
to a series of special body language gestures and rituals.
Most social smoking is part of a social ritual.
A study conducted by Andy Parrot of the University of East
London reports that 80% of smokers say they feel less stressed
when they smoke. However, the stress levels of adult smokers
are only slightly higher than those of non-smokers anyway,
and stress levels increase as the smokers develop a regular
smoking habit. Parrot also found that stopping smoking actu-
ally leads to a reduction of stress. Science now shows that
smoking is not an aid for mood control because nicotine
dependency
 heightens
 stress levels. The supposed relaxing
effect of smoking only reflects the reversal of the tension and
irritability that develops during a smoker's nicotine depletion.
In other words, the smoker's mood is normal during smoking,
and stressed when
 not
 smoking. That means that for a smoker
to feel normal, the smoker must always have a lit cigarette in
his mouth! Furthermore, when smokers quit smoking, they
gradually become less stressed over time. Smoking reflects the
reversal effect of the tension and stress caused by the lack of
nicotine in the blood.
Studies show poor moods occur during the first few weeks
after quitting, but there is dramatic improvement once the
nicotine is completely gone from the body, reducing craving
for the drug and the stress that results from it.
Smoking is similar to hitting yourself over the head with
a hammer because, when you stop, you feel better.
267

--- Page 262 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_262_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Even though smoking is now banned in many places and con-
texts, it's an advantage to understand the connection between
smoking body language signals and a person's attitude.
Smoking gestures play an important part in assessing emo-
tional states as they are usually performed in a predictable
ritualistic manner that can give important clues to the
smoker's state of mind or to what they are trying to achieve.
The cigarette ritual involves tapping, twisting, flicking, waving
and other mini-gestures indicating that the person is experi-
encing more tension than may be normal.
Differences Between Men and Women
When women smoke they will often hold the cigarette high
with their wrist bent back in a wrist display gesture, leaving
the front of the body open. When men smoke they keep their
wrist straight to avoid looking effeminate and drop their
smoking hand down below chest level after they puff, keeping
the front of the body protected at all times.
Twice as many women smoke as men and both sexes take
the same number of puffs per cigarette, but men hold the
smoke in their lungs longer, making them more susceptible to
lung cancer than women.
Women use the cigarette as a social display
to open the body and display the wrist; men close their
bodies when they smoke and prefer secretive holds
268

--- Page 263 ---

The Secret Signals of Cigarettes, Glasses and Make-up
Men will often use the
 Pinch Hold
 when smoking, especially if
they are trying to be secretive, keeping the cigarette hidden
inside the palm. This gesture is commonly used in the movies
by actors who play tough guys or who are acting sneaky or
suspicious.
Smoking as a Sexual Display
Films and media advertising have always portrayed smoking as
sexy. Smoking is another opportunity to emphasise our sex
differences: it allows a woman to use wrist displays (we'll
discuss this in Chapter 15) and open her body to a man and it
allows the cigarette to be used like a small phallus being seduc-
tively sucked between her lips. A man can highlight his
masculinity by holding the cigarette secretively and seduc-
tively. Previous generations used a seductive smoking ritual as
an acceptable form of courtship with a man offering to light a
woman's cigarette while she touched his hand and held his
gaze longer than usual as she thanked him. In many places
today, however, smoking is as popular as a fart in a spacesuit
so the smoking courtship ritual is virtually dead. The key to
the perceived female sexual attraction behind smoking is the
submissive attitude it implies; in other words, it carries the
subtle message that a woman who smokes can be persuaded to
do things that are not in her best interests. While blowing
smoke in a person's face is unacceptable everywhere, in Syria
it's seen as a sexual invitation when a man does it to a woman!
How to Spot a Positive or Negative Decision
Whether a person has a positive or negative attitude towards
his circumstances is revealed by the direction in which his
smoke is exhaled, whether it's up or down. We are assuming
here that the smoker is not blowing the smoke upwards to
avoid offending others and that he could have blown the
2 6 9

--- Page 264 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_264_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_264_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
smoke in either direction. A person who is feeling positive
superior or confident about what he sees or hears will blow the
smoke in an upward direction most of the time. Conversely, a
person in a negative, secretive or suspicious frame of mind will
blow the smoke down most of the time. Blowing down and
from the corner of the mouth indicates an even more negative
or secretive attitude.
Smoke blown up: confident, superior, positive;
smoke blown down: negative, secretive, suspicious
In films, the leader of a motorcycle gang or criminal syndicate
is usually portrayed as a tough, aggressive man who, as he
smokes, tilts his head back sharply and with controlled preci-
sion blows the smoke towards the ceiling to demonstrate his
superiority to the rest of the gang. In contrast, Humphrey
Bogart was often cast as a gangster or tough guy who held his
cigarette inverted in his hand and blew the smoke down from
the corner of his mouth as he planned a jailbreak or other
devious activity. There also appears to be a relationship
between how positive or negative the person feels and the
speed at which he exhales the smoke. The faster the smoke is
blown upwards the more superior or confident; the faster it is
blown down, the more negative he feels.
If a smoker is playing cards and is dealt a good hand, he is
likely to blow the smoke upwards, whereas a poor hand may
cause him to blow it downwards. While some card players use
a 'poker face' when playing cards as a way of not showing any
270

--- Page 265 ---

The Secret Signals of Cigarettes, Glasses and Make-up
body signals that may give them away, other players like to be
actors and use misleading body language to lull the other
players into a false sense of security. If, for example, a poker
player was dealt four of a kind and he wanted to bluff the
other players, he could throw the cards face down on the table
in disgust, curse, cross his arms and put on a non-verbal
display indicating he'd been dealt a poor hand. But then he
quietly sits back and draws on his cigarette and blows the
smoke upwards. And then he Steeples. It would be unwise for
the other players to now bet on the next hand, as they would
probably be beaten. Observation of smoking gestures in
selling situations shows that when smokers are asked to buy,
those who have already reached a positive decision blow the
smoke upwards, whereas those who have decided not to buy,
blow downwards.
The original study of smokers we carried out in 1978
showed that smokers took significantly longer to reach a deci-
sion in a negotiation than non-smokers and that the smoking
ritual is performed most often during the tense moments of
the negotiations. Smokers, it seems, are able to stall decision-
making by diverting their attention to the smoking process. So
if you want quicker decisions from smokers, negotiate in a
room that displays a large 'No Smoking' sign.
Cigar Smokers
Cigars have always been used as a means of displaying superi-
ority because of their cost and size. The big-time business
executive, the gang leader and those in high-status positions
are often portrayed as smoking cigars. Cigars are used to cele-
brate a victory or achievement such as the birth of a baby, a
wedding, clinching a business deal or winning the lottery. It is
not surprising that most of the smoke exhaled by cigar
smokers is blown upwards. At a celebration dinner where
cigars were distributed freely we noted that of 400 recorded
cigar smoke exhalations, 320 were in an upward direction.
271

--- Page 266 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_266_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
How Smokers End a Session
Most smokers smoke their cigarette down to a certain length
before extinguishing it in an ashtray. Women tend to slowly stub
the cigarette out while men are likely to crush it with the thumb.
If the smoker lights a cigarette and suddenly extinguishes it
earlier than he normally would, he has signalled his decision to
terminate the conversation. Watching for this termination
signal can allow you to take control or to close the conversa-
tion, making it appear that it was your idea to end things.
How to Read Glasses
Almost every artificial aid a person uses gives them an oppor-
tunity to perform a number of revealing gestures and this is
certainly the case with those who wear glasses. One of the most
common gestures is placing one arm of the frame in the mouth.
Using the glasses to
stall for time
As Desmond Morris pointed out, the act of putting objects
against the lips or in the mouth is a momentary attempt by the
person to relive the security he experienced as a baby at his
mother's breast. This means that the
 Glasses-Arm-in-Mouth
gesture is essentially a reassurance gesture.
If you wear glasses you may sometimes feel as if you are
looking at life through two toilet paper rolls, but you are per-
ceived by others as being more studious and intelligent,
particularly in the early stages of a meeting. In one study,
people pictured wearing glasses were judged by respondents as
272

--- Page 267 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_267_00.jpeg]

The Secret Signals of Cigarettes, Glasses and Make-up
being 14 IQ points more intelligent compared to when they
were not wearing them. This effect lasted less than five
minutes, however, so you would be wise to consider wearing
them only for short interviews.
The 'intelligent' look is reduced, however, if you wear glasses
with oversized lenses, Elton John-style coloured frames or
designer glasses with distracting initials on the frame. Wearing
glasses that are one size larger than the face can make younger
people look older, more studious and more authoritative.
Solid frame glasses can make you look more sincere
and intelligent; over-the-top frames don't
In our study using pictures of people's faces, we found that
when you add glasses to a face in a business context, respon-
dents 
describe 
that 
person 
as 
studious, 
intelligent,
conservative, educated and sincere. The heavier the frame on
the glasses the more frequently these descriptions were likely
to be used and it made little difference whether the face was
male or female. This could be because the leaders of business
who wear glasses use heavier frames. So in a business environ-
ment, glasses are a statement of power. Frameless, small or
spindly frames convey a powerless image and say that you are
more interested in fashion than business. The reverse holds
true in social contexts but in these situations you are selling
273

--- Page 268 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
yourself as a friend or mate. We advise people in positions of
power to wear stronger frames to make serious points, such as
reading a financial budget, and frameless styles when convey-
ing a 'nice guy' image or being 'one of the boys'.
Stalling Tactics
As with cigarette smoking, the Glasses-Arm-in-Mouth action
can be used to stall or delay a decision. In negotiating, it has.
been found that this gesture appears most frequently at the
close when the person has been asked for a decision. Continu-
ally taking the glasses off and cleaning the lenses is another
method used by glasses wearers to gain time for a decision.
When this gesture is seen immediately after a decision has
been asked for, silence is the best tactic.
The gestures that follow Glasses-Arm-in-Mouth signal the
person's intention and allow an alert negotiator to respond
accordingly. For example, if the person puts the glasses back
on, this often means that he wants to 'see' the facts again.
Folding the glasses and putting them away signals an intention
to terminate the conversation and throwing the glasses onto
the desk is symbolically rejecting the proposal.
Peering-Over-the-Glasses
Actors in films made during the 1920s and 1930s used
 Peering-
Over-the-Glasses
 to portray, for example, a critical or
judgemental person such as a teacher in an English public
school. Often the person would be wearing reading glasses and
find it more convenient to look over the tops, rather than
removing them to look at the other person. But whoever is on
the receiving end of this look may feel as though he is being
judged or scrutinised. The habit of looking over the glasses
can be a very costly mistake because the listener may respond
to this look with negatives such as folded arms, crossed legs or
2 7 4

--- Page 269 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_269_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_269_01.jpeg]

The Secret Signals of Cigarettes, Glasses and Make-up
an argumentative attitude. If you wear glasses, remove them
when speaking and put them back on to listen. This not only
relaxes the other person, but allows you to have control of the
conversation. The listener quickly becomes conditioned that
when you take your glasses off, you're taking the floor, and
when you put them back on, it's his turn to talk.
Peering-Over-the-Glasses intimidates everyone
Contact lenses can make your pupils appear dilated and moist
and can also reflect lights. This can give you a softer, more
sensual appearance, which is fine for social contexts but can be
disastrous in business, especially for women. A woman can
find herself trying her best to persuade a businessman to buy
her ideas while he is mesmerised by the sensual effect of her
contact lenses and doesn't hear a word she says.
Tinted glasses and sunglasses are never acceptable in busi-
ness contexts and arouse suspicions in social environments.
When you want to convey that you see things clearly and pre-
cisely you must have clear glass in the frames - keep sunglasses
and tinted lenses for outdoors.
Wearing Glasses on the Head
People who wear dark sunglasses during meetings are seen as
suspicious, secretive and insecure while those who wear them
275

--- Page 270 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_270_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
on their head are perceived to be relaxed, youthful and 'cool'
- just back from Club Med, in fact. This is because they give
the wearer the appearance that they have two huge eyes with
dilated pupils on the top of their head; this mimics the non-
threatening effect that babies and cuddly toys with painted
large pupils have on us.
Creating the 'Four Eyes'
effect of dilated pupils
The Power of Glasses and Make-up
Wearing make-up definitely adds to perceived credibility, espe-
cially for women in business. To demonstrate this we
conducted a simple experiment. We hired four similar looking
female assistants to help sell our training products at a
seminar. Each woman was given her own separate merchan-
dise table and all were dressed in similar clothing. One
assistant wore glasses and make-up, the second wore glasses
and no make-up, the third had make-up and no glasses and the
fourth had neither make-up nor glasses. Customers would
approach the table and talk with the assistants about the pro-
grammes, spending an average discussion time of between
four and six minutes. When the customers left the tables they
were asked to recall information about each woman's person-
ality and appearance and to choose adjectives from a list that
best described each woman. The woman wearing both make-
up and glasses was described as confident, intelligent,
sophisticated and the most outgoing. Some female customers
saw her as confident but also cold, arrogant and/or conceited
— indicating they may have seen her as a possible competitor,
because the men never saw her this way. The assistant who
276

--- Page 271 ---

The Secret Signals of Cigarettes, Glasses and Make-up
wore make-up and no glasses received good ratings on appear-
ance and personal presentation but lower on personal skills
such as listening and building rapport.
Wearing make-up definitely adds to
a woman's perceived self-confidence.
The assistants who wore no make-up were rated worst on per-
sonal skills and personal presentation and wearing glasses
without make-up made little difference to the customers' atti-
tudes and recall. Most female customers had noted when
make-up was not being worn by the assistant while most men
could not recall whether she wore it or not. Interestingly, both
women who wore make-up were thought to be wearing shorter
skirts than those without make-up, demonstrating that make-
up also presents a sexier image than wearing none. The
bottom line here is clear — make-up gives a woman a more
intelligent, confident and sexier image and the combination of
glasses and make-up in business has the most positive and
memorable impact on observers, so having a pair of non-cor-
rectable glasses could be an excellent strategy for business
meetings.
A Little Lippy, Lady?
For one of our television shows, we asked nine women to turn
up for a series of interviews with both male and female inter-
viewers. For half the interviews, each woman wore lipstick but
they did not wear it to the other half. The interviewer's atti-
tudes after the experiment quickly became clear - the women
Wearing red lipstick and using larger lip displays were seen as
more interested in themselves and in men's attention, while
women with reduced lip displays and muted or pastel colours
were seen as more career oriented and businesslike. The
Women with no lipstick were seen as more serious about work
277
I

--- Page 272 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
than men but lacking in personal skills. Almost all female
interviewers had noticed whether the candidates wore lipstick
or not, while only half of the men noticed when women were
not wearing it. This means that a woman should wear larger
displays of bright red lipsticks for going on dates but smaller,
more understated displays for business meetings. If she works
in businesses that promote female image, such as clothing, cos-
metics and hairdressing, bright displays are seen as positive
because they sell female attractiveness.
Briefcase Signals
The size of a briefcase is linked to perceptions of the status of
its owner. Those who carry large, bulging briefcases are
thought to do all the work and probably take work home
because they are poor time managers. Slim briefcases say that
the owner is only concerned with the bottom line and there-
fore has more status. Always carry a briefcase to one side,
preferably in your left hand, which allows you to shake hands
smoothly with your right hand without fumbling. If you're a
woman, never carry a briefcase and handbag at the same time
- you will be perceived as less businesslike and more disorgan-
ised. And never use a briefcase as a barrier between you and
another person.
Summary
Regardless of what type of object or thing we choose to
handle, wear or smoke, there are special signals and rituals we
display without awareness. The more of these objects we use,
the more we signal our intentions or emotions. Learning how
to read these signals gives you a second set of body language
cues to observe.
278

--- Page 273 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_273_00.jpeg]

Chapter 14
HOW THE BODY
POINTS TO WHERE THE
MIND WANTS TO GO
Often, the body goes one way while
the mind goes another
Have you ever been talking with someone and had the feeling
he would rather be elsewhere than with you, even though he
seems to be enjoying your company? A still photograph of that
scene would probably reveal two things: first, the person's
head is turned towards you and facial signals such as smiling
and nodding are evident; and second, the person's body and
feet are pointing
 away
 from you, either towards another
person or towards an exit. The direction in which a person
points his body or feet is a signal of where he would prefer to
be going.
279

--- Page 274 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_274_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
The man on the right
indicating he wants
to leave
The above illustration shows two men talking in a doorway.
The man on the left is trying to hold the other man's attention,
but his listener wants to continue in the direction his body is
pointing, although his head is turned to acknowledge the
other man's presence. It is only when the man on the right
turns his body towards the other that a mutually interesting
conversation can take place.
In any face-to-face meeting, when one person has decided to
end the conversation or wants to leave, he will turn his body or
feet to point towards the nearest exit. If this was a conversa-
tion involving you, it's a signal that you should do something
to get the person involved and interested or else terminate the
conversation on your terms, allowing you to maintain control.
What Body Angles Say
1. Open Positions
We stated earlier that the distance between people is related to
their degree of interest or intimacy. The angle at which people
orient their bodies also gives non-verbal clues to their attitudes
and relationships.
Most animals, if they want to fight with another animal,
will signal this by approaching head on. If the other animal
280

--- Page 275 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_275_00.jpeg]

How the Body Points to Where the Mind Wants to Go
accepts the challenge, it will reciprocate by also standing head
on. The same applies to humans. If, however, the animal wants
to check out the other animal at close range but doesn't intend
to attack it will approach side on, just as friendly dogs do. And
so it is with humans. A speaker who takes a strong attitude to
his listener while standing straight and facing them directly is
perceived as aggressive. The speaker who delivers exactly the
same message but points his body away from the listener is
seen as confident and goal oriented but not as aggressive.
To avoid being seen as aggressive, we stand with our bodies
angled at 45 degrees to each other during friendly encounters
to form an angle of 90 degrees.
The picture above shows two men with their bodies angled
towards an imaginary third point to form a triangle shape. The
angle formed indicates that a non-aggressive conversation is
probably taking place and they are also displaying similar
status by mirroring. The formation of the triangle invites a
third person to join in the conversation. If a fourth person is
accepted into the group, a square is formed and, for a fifth and
sixth person, either a circle or two new triangles are formed.
In confined spaces like lifts, crowded buses and under-
ground trains, where it's not possible to turn your body away
from strangers to a 45-degree angle, we turn our heads to the
angle instead.
281
Each standing at 45-degree
angles to avoid coming
across as aggressive

--- Page 276 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_276_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
2. Closed Positions
When two people want intimacy, their body angle changes
from 45 degrees to 0 degrees, that is, they face each other. A
man or woman who wants to monopolise a person's attention
uses this position, as well as other courtship gestures, when
they make their play. A man will not only point his body
towards a woman, he also closes the distance between them as
he moves into her Intimate Zone. To accept his approach, she
need only orient her body angle to 0 degrees and allow him to
enter her space. The distance between two people standing in
a
 Closed Position
 is usually less than in the open formation.
Direct body pointing
in the Closed Position
to attempt to get a
captive audience
In addition to courtship displays, both may mirror each other's
gestures and increase eye contact if they are both interested.
The Closed Position can also be used between people who are
hostile towards each other in order to issue a challenge.
Research has shown that men fear attack from the front and
are more wary of a frontal approach, while women fear attack
from behind and are wary of approaches from the rear. So never
stand front-on with a male you have just met. He perceives it as
aggression from a man and sexual interest from a woman. If
you are male, it's acceptable to approach a woman from the
front and eventually you can angle yourself to 45 degrees.
How We Exclude Others
The next illustration shows the 45-degree
 Open Position
 taken
282

--- Page 277 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_277_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_277_01.jpeg]

How the Body Points to Where the Mind Wants to Go
by the first two people, which invites a third person to join in
the conversation.
Open triangular position
encouraging the entry of a
third person
If a third person wants to join two others who are standing in
a Closed Position, he'll be invited only when the other two
angle their bodies to form the triangle. If the third person is
not accepted, the others will hold the Closed Position and turn
only their heads towards him as a sign of recognition; and they
will probably give tight-lipped smiles.
Time to leave —
the new person is
not accepted by
the others
A conversation between three people may begin in the open
triangle position but eventually two people may take the
Closed Position to exclude the third person. This group for-
mation is a clear signal to the third person that he should leave
the group to avoid embarrassment.
283

--- Page 278 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_278_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Seated Body Pointing
Crossing the knees towards another person shows a sign of
interest in or acceptance of that person. If the other person also
becomes interested, he will cross knees towards the first person.
As the two people become more involved with each other they
begin to mirror each other's movements and gestures.
Body Pointing is used to close off a couple
and exclude the man on the right
In the picture above, the man and woman to the left have formed
a closed position that excludes all others, such as the man on the
right. The only way in which the man on the right could partic-
ipate in the conversation would be to move a chair to a position
in front of the couple and attempt to form a triangle, or take
some other action to break their closed formation. But, for now,
they'd like him to take a long walk off a short pier.
Foot Pointing
Not only do the feet serve as pointers indicating the direction
in which a person's mind is going, they also point at people
who we find the most interesting or attractive. Imagine you are
at a social function and you notice a group of three men and
one woman. The conversation seems to be dominated by the
men, and the woman is just listening. Then you notice that the
men all have their front foot pointing towards the woman.
284

--- Page 279 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_279_00.jpeg]

How the Body Points to Where the Mind Wants to Go
Feet signalling what's
on the owner's mind
With this simple non-verbal cue, the men are each telling the
woman they're interested in her. On a subconscious level, she
sees the foot gestures and is likely to stay with the group for as
long as she is receiving this attention. She's standing with both
feet together (neutral) and could eventually point one foot
towards the man she finds the most interesting.
Summary
Few people ever consider the effect that body and foot point-
ing play in influencing the attitudes and the responses of
others. If you want to make others feel comfortable use the 45-
degree Open Position and, when you need to exert pressure,
use the direct body point. The 45-degree position allows the
other person to think and act independently, without feeling
pressured. Never approach men directly from the front or
women from behind.
These body pointing skills take a little practice to master but
they can become natural before long. In your day-to-day
encounters with others, foot pointing, body pointing and pos-
itive gesture clusters such as open arms, visible palms, leaning
forward, head tilting and smiling can make it easy for others
not only to enjoy your company, but to be influenced by your
point of view.
285

--- Page 280 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_280_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_280_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_280_02.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_280_03.jpeg]

Chapter 15
COURTSHIP DISPLAYS AND
ATTRACTION SIGNALS
1. A man and woman approaching on a beach
2. They see each other
3. They pass
Dr Albert Scheflen, author of
 Body Language and the Social
Order,
 found that, when a person enters the company of the
opposite sex, certain physiological changes take place. He
found that high muscle tone became evident in preparation for
a possible sexual encounter, 'bagging' around the face and eyes
decreased, body sagging disappeared, the chest protruded, the
stomach was automatically pulled in, pot-bellied slumping
disappeared, the body assumed an erect posture and the
person appeared to become more youthful in appearance. He
noted that both men and women walked with a livelier,
286

--- Page 281 ---

Courtship Displays and Attraction Signals
springier gait as a display of health and vitality and to convey
their suitability as a partner. A man will stand taller, protrude
his jaw and expand his chest to make himself appear domi-
nant. A woman who is interested will respond by emphasising
her breasts, tilting her head, touching her hair, exposing her
wrists and thereby making herself appear submissive.
The ideal place to observe these changes is on a beach when
a man and a woman approach each other from a distance. The
changes take place when they are close enough to meet each
other's gaze and will continue until after they have passed each
other, at which time their original posture returns.
Body language is a fundamental part of courtship because it
reveals how available, attractive, ready, enthusiastic, sexy or
desperate we are. While some courtship signals are studied
and deliberate, others, such as those just mentioned, are com-
pletely unconscious. It is still unclear how we learn these
signals but research now shows that many may be inborn.
The Emergence of the Colourful Male
In the majority of mammals, it's the male that 'dresses up' to
impress the less than colourful females. Humans, however, do
it the other way around. For centuries, women have done most
of the sexual advertising by decorating themselves in colourful
clothing and jewellery and painting their faces. The exception
to this was during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries in
Europe when men adorned themselves with beautiful wigs and
colourful clothing and out-dressed the average woman. Keep
in mind also that, historically, while women have dressed to
attract men, men have dressed in clothing to either show status
or to frighten away enemies. Today we see the re-emergence of
the self-obsessed male who is again beginning to decorate
himself like a peacock. We see footballers having facials and
manicures, and wrestlers tinting their hair. In the USA we have
seen the emergence of the 'metro-sexual' male — a heterosex-
ual male who copies women's behaviour patterns — he has
287

--- Page 282 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
manicures, pedicures and hair colouring, wears fancy clothes
goes to the jacuzzi, eats organic vegetarian food has botox, a
face-lift and is in touch with his 'feminine side'. While the
'metro-sexual' male seems an oddity to many straight men,
our observation shows 'metro-sexuals' fall into three cate-
gories: gay men; effeminate men; and men who realise that
assuming traditional female behaviours is a great way to meet
lots of women.
Graham's Story
Graham was a man who developed a skill that most men
would kill to have.
He would attend a social function and somehow quickly
'scope out' the available women, make his choice and, in
almost record-breaking time, would be seen heading towards
the exit with her, escorting her to his car and driving back to
his apartment. He would return to the function and repeat this
process, sometimes several times in the same evening. He
seemed to have a built-in radar for finding the available women
at the right time and getting them to go with him. No one
knew how he did it.
Research by animal courtship behaviour zoologists and
behavioural scientists reveals that male and female animals use
a series of intricate courtship gestures, some obvious and
others subtle, and that most of this is done subconsciously. In
the animal world, courtship behaviour in each species follows
specific and pre-determined patterns. For example, in several
species of bird, the male struts around the female giving a
vocal display, puffing up his feathers and performing many
intricate body movements to gain her attention, while the
female appears to display little or no interest. This ritual is
similar to that performed by humans when courtship begins.
Human flirtation involves sequences of gestures and expres-
sions not unlike the courtship dances of birds and other
animals, as seen on wildlife programmes.
288

--- Page 283 ---

Courtship Displays and Attraction Signals
The bottom line is that when a person wants to attract the
opposite sex they do so by emphasising sexual differences. To
discourage the opposite sex we play down or hide these differ-
ences.
Highlighting gender differences is
what makes a person look 'sexy'.
Graham's technique was first to spot women whose body lan-
guage indicated they were available and then to respond with
his own male courtship gestures. Those who were interested
would return the appropriate female signals, giving him the
non-verbal green light to proceed to the next stage.
The success women have in intimate encounters is directly
related to their ability to send courtship signals to men and to
decode those being sent back. For a man, success in the mating
game relies mainly on his ability to read the signals being sent
to him, as opposed to being able to initiate his own moves.
Most women are aware of courtship signals but men are far
less perceptive, often being completely blind to them, which is
why so many men have difficulty finding potential mates.
Women's difficulty in finding partners is not about reading
signals, it's more about finding a man who'll match their cri-
teria.
Graham somehow knew exactly what to look for and
women would describe him as sexy, masculine, humorous and
'someone who makes me feel feminine'. This was their reac-
tion to the constant attention he'd give them and the courtship
signals he used. Men, on the other hand, described him as
'aggressive', 'insincere', 'arrogant' and 'not particularly funny'
~ their reaction to the competition Graham represented. Con-
sequently, Graham had few male friends for obvious reasons -
no man likes a potential rival for the attentions of his woman.
This chapter is devoted to the female signals Graham could see
and to the body language he used in return.
289

--- Page 284 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Why Women Always Call the Shots
Ask any man who usually makes the first move in courtship
and he will invariably say that men do. All studies into
courtship, however, show that women are the initiators 90% of
the time. A woman does this by sending a series of subtle eye,
body and facial signals to the targeted man, who, assuming he
is perceptive enough to pick them up, responds to them. There
are men who will approach women in a club or bar without
being sent the green light but, while some of these men are reg-
ularly successful with finding partners, their overall statistical
success rate is low because they weren't invited first - they're
simply playing the numbers game.
In courtship, women call the tunes most of
the time - men do most of the dancing.
In these cases, if a man detects that his approach will be
unsuccessful he's likely to pretend he's come to talk to her
about other unrelated things and he will use corny lines like,
'You work at the National Bank don't you?' or Aren't you
John Smith's sister?' To be successful in courtship by playing
the numbers game a man has to approach a lot of women to
make a sale - unless, of course, he looks like Brad Pitt. Any
man who crosses the floor to chat up a woman has usually
done so at her request after picking up her body language
signals. It just
 looks
 as if he made the first move because he
made the walk across the floor. Women do initiate up to 90%
of flirtatious encounters but it is done so subtly that most men
think they are the ones taking the lead.
Differences Between Men and Women
Men find it difficult to interpret the more subtle cues in
women's body language and research shows that men tend to
290

--- Page 285 ---

Courtship Displays and Attraction Signals
mistake friendliness and smiling for sexual interest. This is
because men see the world in more sexual terms than women;
men have 10 to 20 times more testosterone than women, which
makes them see the world in terms of sex.
To some men, when a lady says 'no' she means
maybe; when she says 'maybe' she means 'yes'; but
if she says 'yes' she's no lady.
When they meet a possible partner, women send out subtle,
but often deceptive, courting signals to see whether he's worth
pursuing. Women tend to bombard men with courting rituals
in the first minutes of meeting them. Men may misinterpret
these signals and make a clumsy pass. By sending erratic and
ambiguous signals in the early stages, women manipulate men
into showing their hand. This is one reason why many women
have trouble attracting men — men become confused and won't
make an approach.
The Attraction Process
As with other animals, human courtship follows a predictable
five-step sequence that we all go through when we meet an
attractive person.
Stage 1. Eye contact: She looks across the room and spots a
man she fancies. She waits till he notices her then holds his
gaze for about five seconds and then turns away. He now
keeps watching her to see if she does it again. A woman needs
to deliver this gaze, on average, three times before the average
man realises what's happening. This gaze process can be
repeated several times and is the start of the flirting process.
Stage 2. Smiling: She delivers one or more fleeting smiles.
This is a quick half smile that is intended to give a prospec-
291

--- Page 286 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
tive man the green light to make an approach. Unfortunately,
many men are not responsive to these signals, leaving the
woman feeling that he's not interested in her.
Stage 3. Preening:
 She sits up straight to emphasise her
breasts and crosses her legs or ankles to show them to best
advantage or, if she's standing, she tilts her hips and tilts her
head sideways towards one shoulder, exposing her bare neck.
She plays with her hair for up to six seconds — suggesting she
is grooming herself for her man. She may lick her lips, flick
her hair and straighten her clothing and jewellery. He'll
respond with gestures such as standing up straight, pulling
his stomach in, expanding his chest, adjusting his clothing,
touching his hair and tucking his thumbs into his belt. They
both point their feet or entire bodies towards each other.
Stage 4. Talk:
 He approaches and attempts to make small
talk, using cliches such as, 'Haven't I seen you somewhere
before?' and other well-worn lines that are purely intended to
break the ice.
Stage 5. Touch:
 She looks for an opportunity to initiate a
light touch on the arm, either 'accidental' or otherwise. A
hand touch indicates a higher level of intimacy than a touch
on the arm. Each level of touch is then repeated to check that
the person is happy with this level of intimacy and to let them
know that the first touch was not accidental. Lightly brush-
ing or touching the shoulder of a man is done to give the
impression that the woman cares about his health and
appearance. Shaking hands is a quick way to move to the
touch stage.
These first five stages of courtship may seem minor or even inci-
dental but they are critical to starting any new relationship and
are the stages that most people, especially men, find difficult.
This chapter will examine the signals that are most likely to be
sent by men and women - and Graham - during these stages.
292

--- Page 287 ---

Courtship Displays and Attraction Signals
The 13 Most Common Female Courtship
Gestures and Signals
Women use most of the same basic preening gestures as men,
including touching the hair, smoothing the clothing, one or
both hands on hips, foot and body pointing towards the man,
extended intimate gaze and increasing eye contact. Some
women will also adopt the thumbs-in-belt gesture, which,
although it's a male assertion gesture, is used more subtly:
usually only one thumb is tucked into a belt or protrudes from
a handbag or pocket.
Something in the way she moves
Attracts me like no other lover;
Something in the way she woos me...
George Harrison
Women become more sexually active in the middle of their
menstrual cycle, when they are most likely to conceive. It's
during this time that they are more likely to wear shorter
dresses and higher heels, to walk, talk, dance and act more
provocatively and to use the signals we are about to discuss.
What follows is a list of the 13 most common courtship ges-
tures and signals used by women everywhere to show a man
that she could be available.
1.The Head Toss and Hair Flick
This is usually the first display a woman will use when she's
around a man she fancies. The head is flicked back to toss the
hair over the shoulders or away from the face. Even women
with short hair will use this gesture. It's a way for a woman
subtly to show that she cares about how she looks to a man.
This also lets her expose her armpit, which allows the 'sex
perfume' known as pheromone to waft across to the target
man.
293

--- Page 288 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_288_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_288_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_288_02.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
2. Wet Lips and Pouting, Mouth Slightly Open
At puberty, a boy's facial bone structure alters dramatically as
testosterone gives him a stronger, protruding jaw-line, larger
nose and more pronounced forehead - all the essentials for
protection to the face during encounters with animals or
enemies. Girls' bone structure remains largely unchanged and
child-like with more subcutaneous fat, which makes the
female adolescent face appear thicker and fuller, particularly
the lips. Larger, thicker lips therefore become a signal of
femaleness because of their contrast in size to male lips. Some
women have collagen injected into their lips to overstate this
sexual difference and thereby make themselves more appealing
to men. Pouting simply
increases the lip display.
A woman's outer geni-
tal lips are proportionately
the same thickness to her
facial lips. Desmond Morris
describes this as 'self-mimi-
cry', as it is intended to
symbolise the female genital
region. The lips can be made
Sex sirens instinctively know how
to use mouth and lip displays to
get attention
294
Preening the hair and letting pheromones
in the armpit work their magic

--- Page 289 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_289_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_289_01.jpeg]

Courtship Displays and Attraction Signals
to appear wet either by the use of saliva or cosmetics, giving a
woman the appearance of sexual invitation.
When a woman becomes sexually aroused her lips, breasts
and genitals become larger and redder as they fill with blood.
The use of lipstick is an Egyptian invention that is four thou-
sand years old and is intended to mimic facially the reddened
genitals of the sexually aroused female. This explains why, in
experiments using photos of women wearing various lipstick
colours, men consistently find the bright reds the most attrac-
tive and sensual.
3. Self-Touching
As stated earlier, our minds
get our bodies to act out our
secret desires — and so it is
with
 Self-Touching.
 Women
have dramatically more nerve
sensors for experiencing touch
than men, making them more
sensitive to touch sensations.
When a woman slowly and sen-
sually strokes her thigh, neck
or throat it infers that, if a man
plays his cards right, he may be
able to touch her in these same
ways. At the same time, her
self-touch lets her imagine what
it might feel like if the man was
initiating the touch.
Most pictures of women in
sensual poses include plenty of
Self-Touching
4.The Limp Wrist
Walking or sitting while holding a
 Limp Wrist
 is
a submission signal used exclusively by women
and gay men. In a similar way, a bird feigns a
damaged wing to distract prey away from its
Birds will feign an injured wing to get
attention; women use a Limp Wrist
295

--- Page 290 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_290_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_290_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
nest. In other words, it's a great attention getter. It's very attrac-
tive to men because it makes them feel as if they can dominate.
In business situations, however, a Limp Wrist seriously detracts
from a woman's credibility and others will fail to take her seri-
ously, although some men will probably ask her for a date.
5. Fondling a Cylindrical Object
Fondling cigarettes, a finger, the stem of a
wine glass, a dangling earring or any
phallic-shaped object is an unconscious
indication of what may be in the mind.
Taking a ring off and on the finger can also
be a mental representation of having sex.
When a woman does these things, a man is
likely to symbolically try to possess her by
fondling her cigarette lighter, car keys or
any personal item she has nearby.
The stem of the
wine glass suggest-
ing things that may
yet come
6. Exposed Wrists
An interested woman will gradually expose the smooth, soft
underside skin of her wrists to the potential male partner and
will increase the rate she flashes her wrists as her interest
grows. The wrist area has long been considered one of the
highly erotic areas of the female body because it is one of the
more delicate skin areas; it's uncertain
whether this is a learned behaviour or is
innate but it certainly operates on an
unconscious level. The palms are also
usually made visible to the man while
she's speaking. Women who smoke ciga-
rettes find this wrist/palm exposure
simple to do while smoking by simply
holding the palm up beside the shoulder.
The
 Exposed Wrist
 and head toss ges-
tures are often mimicked by homosexual
males who want to take on a feminine
appearance.
296
Exposing the soft
under side of the
wrists is a powerful
attraction signal

--- Page 291 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_291_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_291_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_291_02.jpeg]

Courtship Displays and Attraction Signals
Women put perfume on the underside of the wrist believing
it has something to do with the wrist pulse distributing the
perfume. But its real purpose is to thrust the wrist forward
towards a potential partner. The perfume simply draws atten-
tion to the woman and lets the man see her under-wrists.
7. Sideways Glance Over Raised Shoulder
The Raised Shoulder is self-mimicry of the rounded female
breasts. With partially drooped eyelids, the woman holds the
man's gaze just long enough for him to notice, then she quickly
looks away. This action produces the feeling of peeping in the
woman who does it and being peeped at by the man who
receives it.
Raising the shoulder highlights the femaleness
of roundness and curves
8. Rolling Hips
For childbearing reasons, women have wider hips than men
and have a wider crotch gap between the legs. This means that
when a woman walks she has an accentuated roll which high-
lights her pelvic region. Men can't walk like this, so it becomes
a powerful sex difference signal. It also explains why few
women are good runners because their wider hips make their
legs splay out to the side when they run. Rolling of the hips is
one of the subtle female courtship gestures that has been used
for centuries in advertising to sell goods and services. Women
who see these advertisements have the desire to be like the
model depicted, which results in an increased awareness of the
product being promoted.
297

--- Page 292 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_292_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Wiggling when you walk highlights the
differences between men and women
9.The Pelvic Tilt
Medical evidence shows that a woman in excellent health and
most capable of successfully bearing children has a waist-to-
hips ratio of 70%, that is, her waist is 70% the size of her hips.
This gives her what's known as an hourglass figure. Through-
out recorded history this is the body ratio that has proved the
most dramatic male attention-grabber. Men begin to lose
interest when the ratio exceeds 80% and, for most men, the
greater or lesser the ratio the less attentive he will be. He com-
pletely loses interest when her ratio reaches 100% but still
maintains a level of interest even when it drops below 70%,
but 70% still remains the perfect ratio for reproductive
success. The way a woman highlights this ratio is simple - she
simply tilts her pelvis when she stands.
Tilting the pelvis while standing highlights a
woman's ability to bear children successfully.
298

--- Page 293 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_293_00.jpeg]

Courtship Displays and Attraction Signals
professor Devendra Singh, an evo-
lutionary 
psychologist 
at 
the
University of Texas, studied the
physical attractiveness of Miss
America beauty contestants and
Playboy
 centrefolds over a period
of 50 years and found that the
hips-to-waist ratio that holds the
greatest appeal for men is between
67% and 80%.
Professor Singh conducted a test
using images of women who were
underweight, overweight and of
average weight and showed them
to groups of men who were asked
to rate them in terms of their
attractiveness. Women of average
weight with a hips-to-waist ratio
of around 70% were found to be
the most alluring. In the over-
weight and underweight groups,
Kylie Minogue with a cocktail
of the things all men love —
long hair, neck display, 70%
hips-to-waist ratio, open wet
mouth, pouting, drooping
eyelids, protruding breasts and
rounded buttocks, self-touch-
ing and Hand-on-Hip gestures
the women with the narrowest
waist got the vote. The experiment's remarkable finding was
that men gave the 70% hips-to-waist ratio the highest rating
even when the woman's weight was quite heavy. This means a
woman can be physically larger but will still turn male heads
if she has this ratio.
10. Handbag in Close Proximity
Most men have never seen the contents of a woman's handbag
and studies show that most men are afraid even to touch her
handbag, let alone open it. A woman's handbag is a personal
item that's treated by her almost as if it's an extension of her
body and so it becomes a strong signal of intimacy when she
puts it close to a man. If she finds him particularly attractive,
she may slowly fondle and caress her handbag. She can ask
him to pass the handbag or to even retrieve something from it.
299

--- Page 294 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_294_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_294_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_294_02.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Placing the handbag near him so he can see it or touch it is a
strong signal she's interested; keeping it away from him indi-
cates emotional distance.
Placing her handbag
close to a man is a sign
of acceptance
11.The Knee Point
One leg is tucked under the other and points to the person she
finds the most interesting. This is a relaxed position, which
also takes the formality out of a conversation and gives the
opportunity for a fleeting exposure of the thighs.
Pointing her knee at
the most interesting person
l2.The Shoe Fondle
Dangling the shoe on the end of the foot
also indicates a relaxed attitude and has the
phallic effect of thrusting the foot in and
out of the shoe. This action unsettles many
men without them knowing what is hap-
pening.
The shoe gives a clue
300

--- Page 295 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_295_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_295_01.jpeg]

Courtship Displays and Attraction Signals
The Leg-Twine: men's number
one female sitting position
13.The Leg Twine
Most men agree that the
 Leg Twine
 is the
most appealing sitting position a woman can
take. It's a gesture that women consciously use
to draw attention to their legs. Albert Scheflen
states that one leg is pressed firmly against the
other to give the appearance of high muscle
tone, which, as previously mentioned, is a
condition that the body takes when a person is
ready for sexual performance.
Other leg signals used by women include crossing and
uncrossing the legs slowly in front of the man and gently
stroking the thighs with her hand, indicating a desire to be
touched.
Without referring back to what you have just read,
how many courting signals and gestures can you see?
What Men Look At in Women's Bodies
In
 Why Men Lie & Women Cry
 (Pease) we summarised the
research about which body parts men and women look at on
each other. The research was clear — men's brains are wired to
be attracted to women who show the most healthy reproduc-
tive ability and sexual availability. When it comes to body
shape, both men and women prefer someone with an athletic
301

--- Page 296 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
body shape. To men, this signals high levels of health and a
woman's ability to successfully reproduce his genes.
Evidence shows that men are more attracted to women with
a child-like face - large eyes, small noses, full lips and cheeks
— because these signals evoke paternal, protective feelings in
most men. This is why most advertising for cosmetic surgery
places so much emphasis on these features. Women, con-
versely, prefer men with adult faces that show the ability to
defend - strong jaws, larger brows and strong nose.
Women with child-like faces cause the release of hormones
in men that make them want to protect females.
The good news is that a woman doesn't need to be naturally
beautiful to attract a man - beauty certainly gives her an initial
edge over competitors - she mainly needs to be able to display
the signs that she
 could
 be available. This is why some women
who are not particularly physically attractive always seem to
have plenty of suitors. Overall, a man is more attracted to a
woman by the signs of her availability than by her physical
attractiveness, and you can learn and practise availability
signals. Some women are appalled at the idea of modern men
being initially attracted to a woman based on her appearance
and availability instead of wanting her for her ability to
nurture, communicate, be a domestic goddess or play the
piano. They see discussions on this subject as degrading to
modern women.
But almost every study into attraction conducted over the
last 60 years reached the same conclusions as the painters,
poets and writers over the past 6000 years - a woman's appear-
ance and body and what she can do with it is more attractive
to men than her intelligence or assets, even in the politically
correct twenty-first century. The twenty-first-century man
wants the same immediate things in a woman as his fore-
fathers did at first sight, but, as we said in
 Why Men Lie &
Women Cry,
 he has different criteria for a long-term partner.
302

--- Page 297 ---

Courtship Displays and Attraction Signals
The reality is that you need to attract a man first before he
can find out about all your inner virtues. When you go fishing
you bait the hook with what the fish likes, not with what you
like. Have you ever tasted a worm? You might be repulsed by
the thought but, for a fish, it's his favourite dish.
How Beautiful People Miss Out
Most people are tempted to believe that physical appearance is
the key to attracting a potential partner, but this is largely an
idea promoted by television, films and the media. Extremely
attractive people are rare, and are erroneously promoted as the
standard to which we should all aspire, but studies show that
most of us are sceptical about beautiful people. The studies
found that we prefer to find mates who are roughly as attrac-
tive as we are, which means they are more likely to stay and not
look for a better offer. This preference appears to be inborn, as
babies show a preference for looking at average faces rather
than at beautiful ones.
Is He a Bum, Boobs or Leg Man?
When it comes to a man's favourite female body part, men are
universally split into three fairly even groups - boobs, bums
and legs.
In this section, we will be analysing only the physical char-
acteristics of the female body and why each part has such an
impact on the male senses. A woman's body has evolved as a
permanent, portable sexual signalling system which is
purpose-built to attract male attention for reproduction and
bums, breasts and legs play the most significant part in this
process. This may not be politically correct, but it is biologi-
cally correct.
303

--- Page 298 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_298_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
1. Bums
Men find rounded, peach-shaped buttocks the most attractive.
Female human buttocks differ from other primates in that
other primate females display enlarged, protruding buttocks
only when they are ready for
mating. 
Human 
females
display enlarged buttocks
permanently and are almost
always sexually available to
males. This is because one of
the 
main 
purposes 
of
regular human sexual activ-
ity is to encourage long-term
pair-bonding for the success-
ful rearing of children.
Humans are the only pri-
mates that mate face-to-face
— in other primate species,
the males approach females
from the rear and use her
swollen red buttocks as a
signal that she's ready for
mating. And therein lies the
key to men's attraction to
women's 
bums 
- 
they
always give the impression that she's available for him.
Women's buttocks also have two other purposes: they store fat
for breastfeeding and act as an emergency food storage in lean
times, similar to a camel's hump.
Wearing designer jeans has also become popular because they
highlight the buttocks and give them a firm, rounded look. High-
heeled shoes make the wearer arch her back, push out her
buttocks, and make her wiggle when she walks, which invariably
draws male attention. Marilyn Monroe reputedly chopped three-
quarters of an inch (2cm) off the heel of her left shoe to emphasise
her wiggle. The females of several species of beetle also wiggle
their rears in front of potential mates to attract attention.
3 0 4
Female humans are the only
primates with permanently
enlarged buttocks

--- Page 299 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_299_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_299_01.jpeg]

Courtship Displays and Attraction Signals
2.The Breasts
Most of the world has developed an obsession with breasts in
recent years and cleavage and cosmetic breast enhancement is
now a multi-billion dollar business. This is remarkable consid-
ering that human breasts are little more than enlarged sweat
glands.
Most of the breast consists of fat tissue. This gives them
their rounded shape and most of this tissue is not involved in
milk production.
Overall, breasts serve one clear purpose — sexual signalling.
Breasts mimic a woman's rear view — a relic from the days
when humans walked on all fours. If a monkey or chimp
walked towards you on two
legs you'd be unable to tell
whether it was male or female.
Humans walk upright on two
legs 
and 
enlarged 
female
breasts evolved as a mimic of
the female rear. Tests con-
ducted with pictures of bum
cracks and breast cleavage
convincingly show that most
men are unable to differentiate
one crack from the other.
Tests show that most men can't tell the
difference between a bum crack and
cleavage
305

--- Page 300 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_300_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_300_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Low-cut dresses and push-up bras emphasise this signal by
creating cleavage. Fortunately, nearly all sex research surveys
show that men love breasts in most shapes and sizes - it's the
cleavage that stimulates men the most. It doesn't matter
whether a woman's breasts are the size of a small lemon or
look like watermelons - most men are keenly interested in
them all and love a cleavage. A woman who is attracted to a
man is likely to lean forward and bring her arms closer to her
body, which presses her breasts together and makes a cleavage.
Men's favourite breasts are those of a woman at her sexual and
reproductive peak - in her late teens and early twenties. These
are typical of the breasts seen in men's magazine centrefolds, on
erotic dancers and in advertisements that trade on sex appeal.
Researchers at Purdue University in America found that a
woman hitchhiker can double the number of lifts she is offered
by increasing her bust size by adding 2 inches (5cm) of
padding.
306
BEFORE
AFTER
Mona Lisa after two weeks in the USA

--- Page 301 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_301_00.jpeg]

Courtship Displays and Attraction Signals
When Someone is 'Hot Stuff'
The core temperature for the human body is 98.6 degrees
Fahrenheit but the skin temperature varies depending on our
emotional state. As mentioned earlier, people who are
described as 'cold' and 'stand-offish' are usually also physi-
cally cooler people because their blood is drawn into the leg
and arm muscles for the 'fight or flight' response created by
tension. So when you call someone a 'cold fish' you are correct
on both the emotional and physical levels. Conversely, when
one person is attracted to another, their blood rises to the
surface of the skin, making them warmer. This is why lovers
who are in the 'heat of passion', give a 'warm embrace', have
'steamy encounters' and can be 'hot stuff. In many women,
this increase in body temperature can be seen as their chests
will become flushed or covered in red blotches and their cheeks
also flush.
If you're a man, you just got your
money's worth in the last section.
3.The Lure of Long Legs
There is a biological reason why men
love women's long legs. When a girl
reaches puberty, her legs undergo rapid
lengthening as hormones flood her
body and change her into a woman.
Her extra long legs become a powerful
non-verbal signal telling males she is
sexually maturing and is now capable
of childbearing. This is why long legs
have always been associated with
potent female sexuality.
Supermodels and filmstars have
disproportionate bodies that have
retained their pubescent long legs
307

--- Page 302 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_302_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Men love high heels on a woman because it gives her the illu-
sion of having fertile-looking legs. High heels enhance a
woman's sexual shape by lengthening her legs, arching her
back, forcing her buttocks to protrude, making her feet appear
smaller and thrusting her pelvis forward. This is why the shoe
with the highest heel — the stiletto - with its bondage straps, is
by far the most efficient sex aide on the market.
High heels lengthen a woman's legs, make her
buttocks sway and her breasts protrude.
Most men also prefer a woman with shapely, thicker legs over
those with thinner, spindly legs, because additional fat in the
legs highlights the sex difference between male and female legs
and is an indicator of better lactation. Men like women's legs
to look athletic but will be turned off if she looks like she
could play football for England.
Models such as Elle MacPherson and
Rachel Hunter turned female attraction
signals into a multi-million dollar business
Male Courtship Signals and Gestures
Male displays involve the show of power, wealth and status. If
you're a woman, you'll probably be disappointed with our
summary of male courtship signals because, compared to those
308

--- Page 303 ---

Courtship Displays and Attraction Signals
of women, there aren't too many. While a woman will dress
sensually, wear make-up and use a wide range of courtship ges-
tures, men rev their car engines, brag about how much they
earn and challenge other men. When it comes to courtship
rituals, most men are as effective as someone standing in a river
trying to catch fish by hitting them on the head with a big stick.
Women have more lures and fishing skills to land their fish than
any male could ever hope to acquire.
In this section we'll cover the most common male body lan-
guage signals you're likely to see, much of which is focused
around his crotch. Men are generally not good at sending or
receiving the signals used in the mating game and, as we men-
tioned earlier, women not only control the game and make the
rules, they own the Scoreboard. Most of the time, men simply
react to signals they see.
Some magazines try to convince readers that men's courtship
skills are improving because of the increase in the numbers of
men who are paying more attention to their appearance. Men
now have facials, do their nails and toenails, tint their hair,
straighten their teeth, use hair conditioner and face creams and
wear face powder. In the UK in 2004, a study by Gillette showed
that Scotsmen were Britain's most vain men, spending an
average of 16 minutes a day in front of a mirror preening them-
selves. But most of this behaviour is an increase in male vanity
levels - not in men's ability to read women's courtship signals.
An
 American survey found the three words women
would most like to hear from their male partner were
not 'I love you'. They were 'you've lost weight'
As with most male animals, the human male displays preening
behaviour as a potential partner arrives on the scene. In addi-
tion to the automatic physiological reactions already
mentioned, he will straighten his tie, smooth his collar, brush
imaginary dust from his shoulder and touch his cufflinks or
watch, and rearrange his shirt, coat and other clothing.
309

--- Page 304 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_304_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Male tie-preening gesture
Why Men Talk to Women at the Beginning of
a Relationship
Many men understand that talking at length to a woman about
the personal intimate details of his or her life wins points and
can open her mind - and more — to him. At the beginning of a
new relationship a man will often use the talking strategy but
after the honeymoon period he's likely to go back to his stereo-
typical behaviour of not talking - sticking only to facts,
information and solutions to problems when he does talk.
The Male Crotch Obsession
The most direct sexual display a man can make towards a
woman is the aggressive thumbs-in-belt gesture that highlights
his crotch. He may also turn his body towards her and point
his foot at her, use an intimate gaze and hold her gaze for
longer than usual. When he's seated or leaning against a wall,
he may also spread his legs to display his crotch.
In troops of baboons, and with several other primates,
males display their dominance by using a penis display. By
spreading their legs to give others a full view of the size of
their wedding tackle and giving it the occasional adjustment
from time to time, they can constantly assert and reassert their
dominant status. This same display is used by human males to
assert their manhood, though it is more subtle than the
baboons, mainly because of the hefty prison sentence the
baboon display would carry.
The fifteenth century saw the introduction of the not-so-
310

--- Page 305 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_305_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_305_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_305_02.jpeg]

Courtship Displays and Attraction Signals
subtle codpiece, which purported to display the size of a man's
masculinity and therefore his social status. In the twenty-first
century, New Guinea natives still employ penis displays, while
Western men can achieve the same effect with tight-fitting
pants, small-size Speedo swimming trunks or dangling a large
bunch of keys or the long end of a belt in front of his crotch.
These hanging objects give a man the opportunity to reach
down from time to time for any necessary adjustments. Most
women can't imagine being in a public place and reaching
down to scratch their crotch and are amazed that men will do
this nonchalantly and with regularity. It's the same message for
all male primates, they just use different approaches.
Belt and crotch-
grabbing while
dancing are some
of the less subtle
forms of crotch
display.

--- Page 306 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_306_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
This Mek warrior from Irian
Jaya with his traditional penis
sheath leaves no one confused
about the message
The Crotch Adjust
The most common form of public male sexual display is the
Crotch Adjust.
 "Women everywhere complain that they will be
talking with a man and suddenly, for no apparent reason, he
will begin adjusting or handling his crotch. The inference is
that his genitalia are so large and cumbersome that they need
constant attention to prevent the cut-off of blood circulation.
The
 great thing about being a man is you don't
have to leave the room to adjust yourself.
Watch any group of young males together, especially where
macho attitudes are encouraged, such as in sporting teams,
and you will see continual crotch adjustment as each male
unconsciously tries to assert his masculinity in front of the
others. Women are horrified when a man then proceeds to get
her a drink using the same hand he just used for his adjust-
ments and he then greets people with a handshake.
Wearing a Tie to One Side
If you're a man and you want to find out which women like
you, wear a neatly pressed suit and tie, but wear the tie slightly
312

--- Page 307 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_307_00.jpeg]

Courtship Displays and Attraction Signals
off to one side and put a little lint on one shoulder. Any
women who find you attractive can't resist brushing the lint off
and straightening your tie so that you look just right.
Wearing the tie slightly
off-centre gives interested
women the opportunity
to straighten it
Men's Bodies -What Turns Women On the Most
Surveys show that women continually express a preference for
men with deeper, smoother voices because deep tones are
directly linked to testosterone levels. The change in voice tone
is noticeable in boys because, when they reach puberty, their
bodies flood with male hormones as they begin to change into
men and their voices 'crack' virtually overnight. When a man
is around a woman he fancies he's likely to start speaking in
deeper tones to highlight his masculinity while a responsive
woman is likely to start talking in higher pitched tones to con-
trast her femaleness. Since the feminist movement began in the
1960s, women have taken on male job roles and tasks that
require the production of testosterone, the hormone that
drives us to achieve and that has been described as the 'success
hormone'. Research now shows that in countries such as the
USA, United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand where
feminism has been more influential, women's voices have
become deeper because women have become more assertive
and authoritative. Hopefully, the hairy chest won't follow.
Is She a Chest, Legs or Bum Gal?
Women's sexual responses to men are triggered visually by
313

--- Page 308 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_308_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
certain aspects of the male body. When it comes to a woman's
favourite male body parts, women are also universally split
into three groups - legs, bums and chests/arms with bums
taking 40% of the votes for first prize. In this section, we will
be analysing only the physical characteristics of the male body
and why each part has such an impact on the female senses.
Overall, women also look for athletic body shape, broad
shoulders, muscular chest and arms and a tight butt. Even in
the twenty-first century, surveys overwhelmingly show women
still want a man who looks as if he can wrestle animals and
fight off invaders.
Male bodies are purpose built to chase, catch and
wrestle animals, carry heavy things and kill spiders.
1.
 Broad Shoulders, Chest and Muscular Arms
The upper torso of the hunting male is wide and tapers to
narrow hips, whereas a woman's body is narrower at the
shoulders and widens at the hips. Men evolved these features
to allow them to lug heavy
weapons over long distances
and carry home their kills.
The male chest developed
to house large lungs enabling
more effective distribution of
oxygen and allowing him to
breathe 
more 
efficiently
when running and chasing. In
past generations, the bigger
his chest, the more respect
Women are attracted to a well-
defined male upper body, but most
dislike the 'muscle man' body-
builder look; a woman feels he is
likely to be more interested in his
own beauty than in hers.
314

--- Page 309 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_309_00.jpeg]

Courtship Displays and Attraction Signals
and power a man commanded, and this is still the case with
most surviving primitive tribes.
2.The Small,Tight Bum
A small, compact bum is the favourite of women everywhere
but few understand its magnetic attraction. The secret is that
a tight, muscular rear is necessary to make the strong forward
thrusting motion needed for successful sperm transfer during
sex. A man with a fat or flabby
 derrière
 has difficulty with this
forward movement and has a tendency to throw his entire
body weight into the thrust. For women, this isn't ideal, as the
man's weight can be uncomfortable on her and make it diffi-
cult to breathe. By contrast, the small, tight rear promises a
greater chance of doing an effective job.
The Internet has many
sites for women to rate
men's bums
3. Narrow Hips and Muscular Legs
Men's legs are attractive to women only insofar as they are
symbols of masculine power and endurance. The powerful,
angular legs of the human male are the longest of all primates
and his narrow hips allow him to run swiftly over long dis-
tances to chase and hunt. Women's wide hips cause many
women to have difficulty running, as their lower legs and feet
often flay out to the side to balance body weight. Leading US
315

--- Page 310 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
neuropsychology professor Dr Devendra Singh discovered that
women find male hips with a 90% waist-to-hips ratio the most
appealing.
Summary
The world is in the grip of a singles epidemic. In all Western
countries, marriage rates are the lowest they've been in 100
years — half the rate of 25 years ago. In places such as Aus-
tralia, 28% of adults have never married.
The fact that men and women are initially motivated by
body features may be disheartening to some but, on the plus
side, everyone has the chance to improve their appearance and
make a conscious decision to increase their attractiveness to
the opposite sex. For those who choose to stay as they are,
online dating, IT matchmaking, flirt-a-thons and speed-dating
events are booming everywhere and the
 New York Times
 esti-
mated that it had an annual turnover of 3 billion dollars
worldwide in 2003. And because men have more difficulty than
women in meeting the opposite sex, most flirting classes
worldwide have more male attendees than women.
316

--- Page 311 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_311_00.jpeg]

Chapter 16
OWNERSHIP, TERRITORY
AND HEIGHT SIGNALS
We stake a physical claim on what we believe is ours
We lean against other people or objects to show a territorial
claim to that person or object. Leaning against something can
also be used as a method of dominance or intimidation if the
object being leaned on belongs to someone else. For example,
if you are going to take a photograph of a friend and his new
car, boat or personal belonging, it's likely that he'd lean
against his new possession, put his foot on it or place his arm
around it. When he touches the property, it becomes an exten-
sion of his body and this is how he shows others that it belongs
to him. Lovers hold hands or put their arms around each other
in public to show competitors they have a claim over that
person. The business executive puts his feet on his desk or
317

--- Page 312 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_312_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_312_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_312_02.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
leans against his office doorway to show his claim to that
office and its furnishings. A woman dusts imaginary pieces of
lint from the shoulder of her husband to tell other women he's
taken.
People showing ownership by connecting
the item to their body
Victoria Beckham confirms
her claim to David Beckham
by imprinting her hand on
his chest
An easy way to intimidate someone
is to lean against, sit on or use their
possessions without their permis-
sion. In addition to the obvious
abuse of another's territory or pos-
sessions, such as sitting at his desk
or borrowing his car without
asking, there are many other subtle
intimidation techniques. One is to
lean 
against the 
doorway in
another person's office or to sit in
his chair.
A salesperson calling on a cus-
tomer at his home should ask,
'Which chair is yours?' before he
sits, because sitting in the wrong
chair intimidates its owner and puts
him offside.
318

--- Page 313 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_313_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_313_01.jpeg]

Ownership, Territory and Height Signals
The doorway intimidator
Some people are habitual doorway leaners and go through life
intimidating everyone from first introduction. These people
are well advised to practise an upright stance with palms
visible to create a favourable impression on others. Others
form up to 90% of their opinion about us in the first four
minutes and you never get a second chance to make a first
impression.
Michael Jackson's purpose in his infamous
'baby dangling' incident was to close the
distance between the baby and the fans so
that they could experience temporary 'own-
ership' of the baby. He just overlooked the
distance between the baby and the ground.
If the boss's chair has no arms —
which is unlikely as this is usually
a feature of the visitor's chair - he
may be seen with one or both feet
on the desk. If his superior enters
the office, it is unlikely that the
boss — who is now the subordinate
- would continue to use such an
obvious territorial/ownership ges-
ture, but instead would resort to more subtle versions such as
putting his foot on the bottom drawer of his desk, or, if there
319

--- Page 314 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_314_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
are no drawers in the desk, placing his foot hard against the
of the desk to stake his claim to it.
Claiming ownership
of the desk
Body Lowering and Status
Historically, raising or lowering the height of your body in
front of another person has been used as a means of estab-
lishing superior-subordinate relationships. We refer to a
member of royalty as 'Your Highness', whereas individuals
who commit unsavoury acts are called 'low', 'low down' and
'low lifes'. No one wants to be described as 'short-sighted', be
'looked down on' or 'fall short' of their targets. The protest
rally speaker stands on a soapbox to be higher than everyone
else, the judge sits higher than the rest of the court, the
Olympic gold medal winner stands higher than the other
medal winners, those who live in a penthouse command more
authority than those who live at ground level, some cultures
divide their social classes into the 'upper class' and 'lower
class' and pharmacists stand 18 inches above everyone else.
Superior people can sometimes get on their 'high horses',
'rise to the occasion', 'put themselves on a pedestal' or become
'high and mighty'. And no self-respecting God would ever live
down in the boondocks, on the salt flats or in the valley. They
live in Valhalla, on Mount Olympus or in Heaven above. And
everyone understands the significance of standing to speak to
a meeting to gain control.
320

--- Page 315 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_315_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_315_01.jpeg]

Ownership, Territory and Height Signals
We reduce our height to show subordination to
others and increase height to gain status
Most women curtsey when they meet royalty and men incline
their heads or remove their hats, making themselves appear
smaller than the royal person. The modern salute is a relic of
the act of removing a hat to make oneself appear shorter. The
person symbolically goes to remove their hat and the salute is
the modern result. Today's hatless man can still be seen giving
a simple tap to his forehead when he meets a woman as a relic
of his hat-doffing ancestors' habit. The more humble or sub-
ordinate an individual feels towards another, the lower he
stoops his body.
Some people described Roger as the backbone
of the organisation. Others didn't go that high.
Some Japanese businesses have reintroduced the 'bowing
machine', which teaches staff the exact angle to bow to a cus-
tomer, usually 15 degrees for a customer who is 'just looking'
and up to 45 degrees for a purchaser. In business, the people
321

--- Page 316 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
who continually 'bow' to the management are labelled with
derogatory name-tags such as 'bootlickers', 'crawlers' and
'brown-nosers'.
He's a Big Man Around Town
Despite what it may be politically correct to believe about
height, studies convincingly show that taller people are more
successful, healthier and live longer than short people. Dr
Bruce Ellis, Head of Experimental Psychology at the Univer-
sity of Canterbury in New Zealand, found that taller men also
have greater reproductive success than shorter men, not only
because increased testosterone levels are linked to tallness but
also because women choose men who are taller than they are
as partners. Taller men are seen as more protective and can
pass this advantage on through their genes. Men prefer shorter
women because it gives men the apparent height advantage.
The shorter you are the more likely it is that you will be
interrupted by men. One of our clients, a 5 feet 1 inch (1.55m)
female senior manager in a predominately male accounting
firm, complained that she was continually being interrupted
by her peers at management meetings and it was rare for her
to present her ideas fully or even finish her sentences. We
devised a strategy that required her to stand and go to the
coffee table and, when she returned to her seat, remain stand-
ing as she spoke and presented her thoughts. She was amazed
at the difference it made to how she was received. While she
can't use the coffee routine every time, it allowed her to see
how, by simply adjusting her height perspective, she could gain
more authority.
You always
 see
 taller men with shorter
women but rarely the reverse.
322

--- Page 317 ---

Ownership, Territory and Height Signals
In our seminars, we constantly observe how top-level man-
agers are significantly taller than everyone else. Through the
Institutes of Management, we recorded the height and salaries
of 2566 managers at company director level and found that
every inch of height above the company norm added almost
$1,000 to that person's salary package, regardless of whether the
person was a man or a woman. Research in the USA showed
that height is also linked to financial success: on Wall Street
every inch of height added $600 to each person's bottom line.
The same correlation has even been found in government
departments and universities, who supposedly promote people
based on their competence level and equality, not their height.
One American study showed that tall people not only got the
best jobs in American firms, they received higher starting
salaries. Those over 6 feet 2 inches (1.9m) got 12% more than
those under 6 feet (1.85m).
Why Some People Seem Taller on TV
People who are 'perceived' as tall also do better in politics on
television: on-screen people are only six inches tall (15cm) so
we are left subconsciously to decide how tall the person really
is. The height we decide they are and the amount of power we
give them is directly related to the power and authority of their
presentation. This is why so many short actors, politicians and
personalities do so well on television - they simply act tall. For
example, Australian Prime Minister John Howard became
stuck with the nickname 'Little Johnny' because, on television,
his approach was softer and quiet. Our surveys found that the
voting electorate perceived him as 5 feet 6 inches (1.67m) - rea-
sonably short for a man - whereas in fact he was 5 feet 9 inches
(1.75m). One of his adversaries, former Prime Minister Bob
Hawke, was constantly seen as over 6 feet (1.85m) tall as he
always gave a 'big' performance. In fact, he was 5 feet 7 inches
(1.7m) tall.
323

--- Page 318 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
On television, a strong performance
makes you seem taller.
Pioneering research by Wilson (1968) found that when a
student addressed other students, he would be seen as 5 feet 8
1/2 inches (1.75m) tall by the other students. When the same
student was introduced as a professor, the audience perceived
him as 6 feet 3 inches (1.9m) tall. A powerful performance or
an impressive title both lead to you being perceived as taller.
Try the Floor Test
If you want to test the authority that goes with height, try this
exercise with a friend. First, lie on the floor and get your friend
to stand over you to maximise the height difference. Next, ask
your friend to reprimand you as loudly and forcefully as he
can. Then change positions - you stand, he lies down - and
ask him to repeat his reprimand. You'll find that not only does
he find it nearly impossible to do, his voice will sound differ-
ent and he'll lack any authority while trying.
The Downsides of Height
Being tall, however, is not always a bonus. While tall people
often command more respect than short people, height can
also be detrimental to some aspects of one-to-one communi-
cation, for instance where you need to 'talk on the same level'
or have an 'eye-to-eye' discussion with another person and do
not want be perceived as 'too big for your boots'.
In Britain, Philip Heinicy, a 6 feet 8 inches (2m) tall chemi-
cal salesperson, formed the Tall Person's Club to promote the
practical, medical and social needs of the taller members or
society. He found that his height was threatening to his cus-
tomers; they felt imposed upon and could not concentrate on
324

--- Page 319 ---

Ownership, Territory and Height Signals
what he had to say. He discovered that when he gave a sales
presentation in a seated position, not only did the atmosphere
become more conducive to good communication, the removal
of his physical threat also increased his bottom line sales by a
whopping 62%.
How Body Lowering Can Sometimes Raise
Status
There are some circumstances in which lowering your body
can be a dominance signal. This happens when you slouch
down and make yourself comfortable in an easy chair in
another person's home while the owner is standing. It's the
complete informality on the other person's territory that com-
municates the dominant or aggressive attitude.
A person will always be superior and protective on his own
territory, especially in his own home, and so practising sub-
missive gestures and behaviour is effective for getting the
person on side with you.
How TV Politicians Can Win Votes
For over three decades, we have advised people who appear in
the public eye on how to be seen as credible and believable.
They have ranged from rock stars and politicians to weather
forecasters and Prime Ministers. On one occasion, two politi-
cal leaders were invited to give two television debates about
how they would run the country. One candidate - call him
candidate A - was 5 feet 9 inches (1.75m) and was seen by
voters as shorter due to his milder, quieter approach, while his
competitor - candidate B - was 6 feet 2 inches (1.9m) and per-
ceived by the electorate as even taller due to his assertive,
authoritative attitude. After the first TV debate, the shorter
candidate was seen as having lost badly to the taller one. Can-
didate A called us for advice and we suggested a number of
3 2 5

--- Page 320 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
strategies including cutting 4 inches (10cm) off his lectern,
which would give the same visible distance between the top of
the lectern and his chin as candidate B had. We also suggested
that A should arrange for his TV camera to be slightly lowered
to shoot upwards, giving him a taller appearance. We told him
to pitch his message directly to the camera so that each voter
felt as if they were being addressed personally. It worked. After
the next debate, candidate A was seen as being the clear
winner and the media reported that he 'had a new sense of
authority and leadership'. After the election that followed,
candidate A became leader of the country. The lessons here
were that voters generally aren't deeply interested and don't
remember much of what politicians say in election debates.
Voters cast their final vote based on the belief that the winner
is best suited to be the leader.
How to Placate Angry People
It's possible to avoid intimidating others by consciously
making yourself appear smaller in relation to them. Let's
examine the body language of the situation in which you have
committed a minor driving offence, such as failing to stop at a
stop sign, not giving way or speeding, and you are pulled over
by the police. In these circumstances, the officer may regard
you as an adversary as he approaches your vehicle, and most
drivers' reaction is to remain in the car, wind the window
down and make excuses or deny the offence. The body lan-
guage negatives of this are:
1. The officer is forced to leave his territory (the patrol car)
and come across to your territory (your vehicle).
2. Assuming that you are in fact guilty, your excuses may rep-
resent an attack to the officer.
3. By remaining in your car, you create a barrier between
yourself and the police officer.
326

--- Page 321 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_321_00.jpeg]

Ownership, Territory and Height Signals
Considering that under these circumstances the police officer
is in the superior position to you, this behaviour serves only to
make things go from bad to worse and your chances of getting
a ticket are increased. Instead, try this if you are pulled over:
1. Immediately get out of your car (your territory) and go fo-
wards to the police officer's car (his territory). In this way
he is not inconvenienced by having to leave his space.
(Don't try this approach in the USA where getting out of
your car and rushing towards an officer may result in
sudden lead poisoning.)
2. Stoop your body over so that you are smaller than him.
3. Lower your own status by telling the officer how irrespon-
sible you've been and raise his status by thanking him for
pointing out your mistake and telling him that you realise
how difficult his job must be, having to deal with fools like
you.
4. With your palms out, in a trembling voice, ask him not
to give you a ticket. If you're female and the officer is
male, smile a lot, blink your eyes repeatedly and talk in a
higher pitched voice. If you're a man, just take the ticket
and pay it.
'Please don't book me!'
This behaviour shows the police officer that you are not a
threat and encourages him to take the role of a reprimanding
parent, in which case he may decide to give you a stern
warning and tell you to be on your way — without a ticket!
When this technique is used as directed, it can save you from
327

--- Page 322 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
being booked in up to 50% of instances where a police car
pulls you over.
The same technique can be used to calm an irate customer
who is returning faulty goods to a retail store or wants to com-
plain about something. In this case, a store counter represents
a barrier between the store staff and the customer. Control of
an irate customer would be difficult if the staff remained on
their side of the counter, and creates a 'you-versus-me'
approach which can make the customer even angrier. If the
staff member moves around to the customer's side of the
counter with his body stooped over and palms visible and uses
the same technique we used with the police officer, it can
usually placate an angry person. Staying behind a desk or
counter can raise anger levels.
What's Love Got to Do With It?
Polish anthropologist, Dr Boguslaw Pawlowski, found that -
in an ideal relationship - trust, money and respect are less
important than the height difference ratio 1 to 1.09. His study
in 2004 found that, to ensure marital bliss, a man needs to be
1.09 times taller than his partner. This formula fits in the case
of failed romances, for instance Nicole Kidman (5 feet 11
inches, 1.8m) and Tom Cruise (5 feet 7 inches, 1.7m).
Couples who fit this success ratio include the following:
Cherie Blair and Tony Blair = 1.10
Jennifer Anniston and Brad Pitt =1.11
Victoria Beckham and David Beckham = 1.09
Those who technically fail the test ratio include:
Camilla Parker-Bowles and Prince Charles = 1.01
Penny Lancaster and Rod Stewart = 0.97
328

--- Page 323 ---

Ownership, Territory and Height Signals
Some Strategies For Gaining Perceived Height
If you are a shorter person, there are several strategies you can
employ to neutralise the power of taller people who set out to
intimidate you. This is important if you are a woman because
women are, on average, 2 inches (5cm) shorter than men. Set up
a space where you can control the environment by having chairs
of varying heights and ask tall people to sit on the lower chairs.
Sitting neutralises height and sitting the Incredible Hulk on a
low sofa diminishes his perceived power. Sitting at opposite
ends of a table also evens things up, as does leaning in
someone's office doorway to talk while they are seated. Talking
in a public place, such as a bar or in a crowd, or in a car or
plane, also limits the tactics of taller associates. If someone is
overbearing or standing over you while you are sitting, get up
and walk over to a window and gaze outside as you discuss an
issue. You will look as if you are giving deep consideration to
the discussion and the bigger person can't have a height advan-
tage when you aren't looking at them. Finally, acting assertively
can also minimise height differences. These strategies will put
you 'head and shoulders' above the height intimidators and let
you 'stand tall' among those who try to 'get one up' over you.
Summary
Height differences have a significant impact on relationships
but height and power are often just perceptions. Shorter
people can increase their perceived height and are more likely
to be remembered as taller when they wear dark-coloured
clothing, pin-striped suits or trouser suits, softer, more muted
make-up (for women) and full-size chronograph watches. The
smaller the watch size, the less clout a person is perceived to
have. Standing erect, sitting up straight and 'walking tall' are
ways of giving yourself a confident appearance and, because
of the law of cause and effect, you will feel more confident
when you do these things.
329

--- Page 324 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_324_00.jpeg]

Chapter 17
SEATING ARRANGEMENTS
WHERE TO SIT, AND WHY
'Just feel at home and tell me all about it!'
Where you sit in relation to other people is an effective way of
obtaining co-operation from them. Aspects of their attitude
towards you can also be revealed in the seating position they
take relative to you.
We conducted surveys with seminar delegates during the
1970s, 1980s and 1990s to determine which positions at a table
they felt gave the best result for communicating specific atti-
tudes. We did this by delegate involvement at seminars and by
using survey questionnaires from our database. The first
major study in seating positions was conducted by psycholo-
gist Robert Sommer from the University of California, who
analysed a cross-section of students and children in public and
social situations such as bars and restaurants. We applied
Sommer's findings to seating positions in business and negoti-
ation situations. While there are marginal differences between
cultures and the relationships between people, we have sum-
marised here the seating positions you will encounter most of
the time in most situations.
In his book
 Non-Verbal Communication in Human Interac-
3 3 0

--- Page 325 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_325_00.jpeg]

Seating Arrangements
 —
 Where to Sit, and Why
tion,
 Mark Knapp from the University of Vermont noted that,
although there is a general formula for interpretation of
seating positions, the environment may have an effect on the
position chosen. Research conducted with middle-class people
showed that seating positions in public bars can vary from the
seating positions taken in a high-class restaurant. The direc-
tion the seats are facing and the distance between tables can
also have a distorting influence on seating behaviour. For
example, intimate couples prefer to sit side by side wherever
possible, but in a crowded restaurant where the tables are close
together this is not possible and the couples are forced to sit
opposite each other in what is normally a defensive position.
Keeping that in mind, we'll now present the main seating
choices we have in a variety of circumstances at work and
socially.
Take the Table Test
Let's assume that you are going to sit at a rectangular table
with person A and that you are person B. Which seating posi-
tion would you choose in the following circumstances:
• You will interview someone for a job in a small, friendly
company.
• You are going to help someone complete a crossword
puzzle.
• You are going to play chess against someone.
• You are in a public library and don't want any involvement.
Look at the next illustration and make your choices.
Basic seating positions
331

--- Page 326 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_326_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Here are your most likely answers:
• You took, Bl, the Corner Position, to conduct the interview,
as this allows you to see the person clearly without seeming
competitive or aggressive, as you might in B3, or too famil-
iar as in B2.
• You sat in position B2, the Co-operative Position, to help
with the crossword puzzle, because this is where we sit to
give help or build rapport.
• You chose position B3 to play chess against the person. This
is called the Competitive/Defensive Position and is the one
we choose to compete against an adversary because it lets
us have a full view of their face and what they're doing.
• Finally, you used the Diagonal Position, B4, in the library to
communicate your independence or non-involvement.
The Corner Position (B1)
This position is used by people who are engaged in friendly,
casual conversation. It allows for good eye contact and the
opportunity to use numerous gestures and to observe the ges-
tures of the other person. The corner of the desk provides a
partial barrier in case one person begins to feel threatened,
and this position avoids territorial division of the table. This is
the most successful strategic position from which person B can
deliver a presentation, assuming that person A is the audience.
By simply moving the chair to position Bl you can relieve a
tense atmosphere and increase the chances of a positive
outcome.
The Corner Position
332

--- Page 327 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_327_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_327_01.jpeg]

Seating Arrangements
 -
 Where to Sit, and Why
The Co-operative Position (B2)
When two people are thinking alike or both working on a task
together, this position often occurs. We found that
 55%
 of
people chose this position as the most co-operative, or intu-
itively took it when asked to work jointly with another person.
The Co-operative
Position
It is one of the best positions for presenting your case and
having it accepted because it allows good eye contact and the
opportunity for mirroring. The trick is, however, for B to be
able to move into this position without A feeling as if his ter-
ritory has been invaded. This is also a successful position to
take when a third party is introduced into the negotiation by
B. Say, for example, that a salesperson was having a second
interview with a client and the salesperson introduces a tech-
nical expert. The following strategy will work well:
The technical expert is seated at position C opposite
customer A. The salesperson sits at either position B2 (Co-
operative) or Bl (Corner). This allows the salesperson to be
'on the client's side' and to ask the technician questions on
behalf of the client. This position is known as 'siding with the
opposition'.
Introducing a
third person
333

--- Page 328 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_328_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
The Competitive/Defensive Position (B3)
In this arrangement, competitors face each other, just like
Western gunslingers. Sitting across the table from a person can
create a defensive, competitive atmosphere and can lead to
each party taking a firm stand on his point of view because the
table becomes a solid barrier between both parties.
Competitive/Defensive
position
In business scenarios,
 56%
 of respondents saw this as a com-
petitive position but in social situations, such as a restaurant,
35% saw it as conversational. It's the most commonly observed
restaurant sitting position on the dating scene, but this is
mainly because waiters seat people at tables this way. It works
with a couple in a restaurant because it allows good eye contact
while subtly highlighting gender differences by being 'oppo-
site'. In a work environment, however, this position is taken by
people who are either competing with each other or if one is
reprimanding the other. It can also be used by A to establish a
superior/subordinate role when it's used on A's territory.
Why Some Bosses Are Disliked
We found that, in business scenarios, people speak in shorter
sentences from the Competitive/Defensive Position, can recall
less of what was said and are more likely to argue.
A. G. White conducted an experiment in doctors' offices
that showed that the presence or absence of a desk had a sig-
nificant effect on whether a patient was at ease or not. Only
10% of patients were perceived to be at ease when the doctor's
desk was present and the doctor sat behind it. This figure
increased to
 55%
 when the desk was absent. We conducted an
experiment (Pease & Pease, 1990) where we asked 244 senior
3 3 4

--- Page 329 ---

Seating Arrangements — Where to Sit, and Why
managers and 127 lower/middle managers to sketch the furni-
ture arrangement they preferred to have in their offices when
relocating to a new building. A full
 76%
 of the senior man-
agers (185) drew a sketch placing their desks between
themselves and their subordinates. Only 50% of the lower
managers (64) did this and male managers were twice as likely
as females to put the desk between them and others.
The most interesting finding was how other staff members
perceived the managers who did not have their desks placed
like a barrier. These managers were described by their staff as
more fair-minded, more prepared to listen to their ideas
without criticism and less likely to show favouritism to others.
Sitting directly opposite others creates bad vibes.
If B is seeking to persuade A, the Competitive Position reduces
the chance of a successful negotiation, unless B is deliberately
sitting opposite as part of a pre-planned strategy. For example,
it may be that A is a manager who has to reprimand employee
B, and the Competitive Position can add weight to the repri-
mand. On the other hand, if B wants to make A feel superior,
B can deliberately sit directly opposite A.
Whatever business you're in, if it involves dealing with
people you are in the influencing business and your objective
should always be to see the other person's point of view, to put
him at ease and to make him feel right about dealing with you;
the Competitive Position does not lead to that end. More co-
operation will be gained from the Corner and Co-operative
Positions than will ever be achieved from the Competitive Posi-
tion. Conversations are significantly shorter and more pointed
in the Competitive Position.
The Independent Position (B4)
This is taken by people when they don't want to interact with
each other. It occurs between strangers in places such as
libraries, park benches or restaurants and is the position we
3 3 5

--- Page 330 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_330_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_330_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
refer to when we say we are 'diametrically opposite' to an idea.
To 42% of our respondents, the message it conveyed was a
lack of interest and it was read by some as showing indiffer-
ence or hostility. This position should be avoided where open
discussions between people are your goal.
The Independent Position
tells others you don't want
to get involved
It's Not What You Say, It's Where You Sit
As we've said, rectangular tables create a competitive or defen-
sive relationship between people because each person has
equal space, equal frontage and separate edges. It lets everyone
take a 'position' on a given subject and allows more direct eye
contact across the table. Square tables are ideal for having
short, to-the-point conversations or for creating superior or
subordinate relationships. Most co-operation comes from the
person seated beside you, and the one on the right tends to be
more co-operative than the one on the left.
Historically, the person on the right is less likely to be able
to successfully stab you with their left hand, hence the 'right-
hand man' is more favoured and others subconsciously credit
the right-hand person with having more power than the one on
the left side. Most resistance comes from the person seated
directly opposite in the 'gunslinger' position and, when four
people are seated, everyone has someone sitting opposite.
Everyone gets to sit in both
the Competitive and Corner
Positions on a square table
336

--- Page 331 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_331_00.jpeg]

Seating Arrangements - Where to Sit, and Why
King Arthur's Concept
King Arthur used the Round Table as an attempt to give each
of his knights an equal amount of authority and status. A
round table creates an atmosphere of relaxed informality and
is ideal for promoting discussion among people who are of
equal status, as each person can claim the same amount of
table territory. The circle itself has become a worldwide symbol
of unity and strength and simply sitting in a circle promotes the
same effect. Unfortunately, King Arthur was unaware that if
the status of one person is higher than the others in the group
it completely alters the dynamics of group power. The king
held the most power and this meant that the knights seated on
either side of him were silently granted the next highest
amount of power, the one on his right having more than the
one on his left. The power then diminished relative to the dis-
tance that each knight was seated away from the king.
A high status person at
a round table distorts
the power distribution
The knight seated directly opposite King Arthur was, in effect,
in the Competitive/Defensive position and was likely to be the
one to give the most trouble. Sixty-eight per cent of respon-
dents saw the person sitting directly opposite them on a round
table as the one most likely to argue or be competitive. Fifty-
six per cent also said that sitting opposite could be used to
show non-involvement or lack of interest, as in a public library.
When sitting directly beside another person, 71% said they
were either having a friendly conversation or co-operating.
Many of today's business executives use rectangular, square
and round tables. The rectangular desk, which is usually the
work desk, is used for business activity, brief conversations,
reprimands and so on. The round table, often a coffee table
3 3 7

--- Page 332 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_332_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
with wrap-around seating or lower chairs, is used to create an
informal relaxed atmosphere or to persuade. It is also often
found in families that practise democracy or don't have a dom-
inant parent. Square tables belong in a canteen.
Keeping Two People Involved
Let's assume that you, person C, are going to talk with persons
A and B, and that you are all sitting in a triangular position at
a round table. Assume that person A is talkative and asks
many questions and that person B remains silent throughout.
When A asks you a question, how can you answer him and
carry on a conversation without making B feel excluded? Use
this simple but effective inclusion technique: when A asks a
question, look at him as you begin to answer, then turn your
head towards B, then back to A, then to B again until you
make your final statement, looking finally at A again as you
finish your sentence.
This technique lets B feel involved in the conversation and is
particularly useful if you need to have B on side with you.
Keeping both parties
involved when answering
a question
Rectangular Board Tables
On a rectangular table, it seems to be a cross-cultural norm
that position A has always commanded the most influence,
even when all people at the table are of equal status. In a
meeting of people of equal status the person sitting at position
A will have the most influence, assuming that he doesn't have
his back to the door.
3 3 8

--- Page 333 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_333_00.jpeg]

Seating Arrangements
 -
 Where to Sit, and Why
Power Positions at
a rectangular table
If A's back was facing the door, the person seated at B would be
the most influential and would be strong competition for A.
Strodtbeck and Hook set up some experimental jury delibera-
tions which revealed that the person sitting at the head position
was chosen significantly more often as the leader, particularly
if that person was perceived as being from a high economic
class. Assuming that A was in the best power position, person
B has the next most authority, then D, then C. Positions A and
B are perceived as being task-oriented while position D is seen
as being occupied by an emotional leader, often a woman, who
is concerned about group relationships and getting people to
participate. This information makes it possible to influence
power plays at meetings by placing name badges on the seats
stating where you want each person to sit. This gives you a
degree of control over what happens in the meeting.
Why Teacher's Pet Sits On the Left
Researchers at the University of Oregon determined that
people can retain up to three times more information about
things they see in their right visual field than they do in their
left. Their study suggests that you are likely to have a 'better
side' to your face when you are presenting information to
others. According to this research your better side is your left
because it's in the other person's right visual field.
Studies show that the left side of your face
is the best side for giving a presentation.
339

--- Page 334 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Dr John Kershner of Ontario Institute for Studies in Education
studied teachers and recorded where they were looking every 30
seconds for 15 minutes. He found that teachers almost ignore
the pupils on their right. The study showed that teachers
looked straight ahead 44% of the time, to the left 39% of the
time and to their right only 17% of the time. He also found
that pupils who sat on the left performed better in spelling tests
than those on the right and those on the left were picked on less
than those on the right. Our research found that more business
deals are made when a salesperson sits to the customer's left
than to their right. So, when you send a child to school, teach
them to jockey for the teacher's left side but, when they become
adults and attend meetings, tell them to go for the extra per-
ceived power given to the person on their boss's right.
Power Plays at Home
The shape of a family dining-room table can give a clue to the
power distribution in that family, assuming that the dining-
room could have accommodated a table of any shape and that
the table shape was selected after considerable thought. 'Open'
families go for round tables, 'closed' families select square
tables and 'authoritative' types select rectangular tables.
Next time you have a dinner party, try this experiment: place
the shyest, most introverted guest at the head of the table, fur-
thest from the door with their back to a wall. You will be
amazed to see how simply placing a person in a powerful
seating position encourages them to begin to talk more often
and with more authority and how others will also pay more
attention to them.
How to Make an Audience Cry
The Book of Lists —
 a volume that lists each year all sorts of
information about human behaviour — shows public speaking
340

--- Page 335 ---

Seating Arrangements
 -
 Where to Sit, and Why
as our number one fear, with fear of death ranking, on
average, at number seven. Does this mean that, if you're at a
funeral, you're better off being in the coffin than reading the
eulogy?
If you are asked to address an audience at any time, it's
important to understand how an audience receives and retains
information. First, never tell the audience you feel nervous or
overawed - they'll start looking for nervous body language
and will be sure to find it. They'll never suspect you're nervous
unless you tell them. Second, use confidence gestures as you
speak, even if you're feeling terrified. Use Steeple gestures,
open and closed palm positions, occasional Protruding
Thumbs and keep your arms unfolded. Avoid pointing at the
audience, arm crossing, face touching and lectern gripping.
Studies show that people who sit in the front row learn and
retain more than others in the audience, partially because
those in the front row are keener than others to learn and they
show more attention to the speaker in order to avoid being
picked on.
People who sit in the front rows learn more,
participate more and are more enthusiastic.
Those in the middle sections are the next most attentive and
ask the most questions, as the middle section is considered a
safe area, surrounded by others. The side areas and back are
the least responsive and attentive. When you stand to the audi-
ence's left — the right side of the stage — your information will
have a stronger effect on the right brain hemisphere of your
audience's brains, which is the emotional side in most people.
Standing to the audience's right — the left side of stage -
impacts the audience's left brain hemisphere. This is why an
audience will laugh more and laugh longer when you use
humour and stand to the left side of the stage, and they
respond better to emotional pleas and stories when you deliver
them from the right side of the stage. Comedians have known
341

--- Page 336 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_336_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
this for decades - make them laugh from the left and cry from
the right.
The Attention Zone
Using parameters employed by researchers Robert Sommer and
Adams and Biddle, we conducted a study of audiences to esti-
mate how much participation was given by delegates based on
where they were sitting in a seminar room and how much they
could recall of what the presenter was saying. Our results were
remarkably similar to the original Robert Sommer study, even
though our participants were adults and Sommer's were stu-
dents. We also found few cultural differences between
Australians, Singaporeans, South Africans, Germans, Brits,
French or Finns. High-status individuals sit in the front row in
most places — most notably in Japan - and they participate the
least, so we recorded audience data only where delegates were
generally of equal status. The result was what we call the
'Funnel Effect
1
.
Retention of information and participation by attendees based
on their choice of seat (Pease, 1986)
As you can see, when participants are sitting in classroom
style, there is a 'learning zone' shaped like a funnel, which
extends directly down the centre of an audience and across the
front row. Those sitting in the 'funnel' gave the most amount
of participation, interacted most with the presenter and had
342

--- Page 337 ---

Seating Arrangements
 -
 Where to Sit, and Why
the highest recall about what was being discussed. Those who
participated the least sat in the back or to the sides, tended to
be more negative or confrontational and had the lowest recall.
The rear positions also allow a delegate a greater opportunity
to doodle, sleep or escape.
An Experiment in Learning
We know that people who are most enthusiastic to learn
choose to sit closest to the front and those who are least enthu-
siastic sit in the back or to the sides. We conducted a further
experiment to determine whether the Funnel Effect was a
result of where people chose to sit, based on their interest in
the topic, or whether the seat a person sat in affected their par-
ticipation and retention. We did this by placing name cards on
delegates' seats so they could not take their usual positions.
We intentionally sat enthusiastic people to the sides and back
of the room and well-known back-row hermits in the front.
We found that this strategy not only increased the participa-
tion and recall of the normally negative delegates who sat up
front, it
 decreased
 the participation and recall of the usually
positive delegates who had been relegated to the back. This
highlights a clear teaching strategy - if you want someone
really to get the message, put them in the front row. Some pre-
senters and trainers have abandoned the 'classroom style'
meeting concept for training smaller groups and replaced it
with the 'horseshoe' or 'open-square' arrangement because
evidence suggests that this produces more participation and
better recall as a result of the increased eye contact between all
attendees and the speaker.
Getting a Decision Over Dinner
Bearing in mind what has already been said about human ter-
ritories and the use of square, rectangular and round tables,
3 4 3

--- Page 338 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
let's consider the dynamics of going to a restaurant for a meal,
but where your objective is to get a favourable response to a
proposition.
If you are going to do business over dinner, it's a wise strat-
egy to complete most of the conversation before the food
arrives. Once everyone starts eating the conversation can come
to a standstill and alcohol dulls the brain. After you've eaten,
the stomach takes blood away from the brain to help digestion,
making it harder for people to think clearly. While some men
hope to achieve these types of effects with a woman on a date,
it can be disastrous in business. Present your proposals while
everyone is mentally alert.
No one ever makes a decision with their mouth full.
A hundred thousand years ago, ancestral man would return
with his kill at the end of a hunting day and he and his group
would share it inside a communal cave. A fire was lit at the
entrance to the cave to ward off predators and to provide
warmth. Each caveman sat with his back against the wall of
the cave to avoid the possibility of being attacked from behind
while he was engrossed in eating his meal. The only sounds
that were heard were the gnashing and gnawing of teeth and
the crackle of the fire. This ancient process of food sharing
around an open fire at dusk was the beginning of a social event
that modern man re-enacts at barbecues, cookouts and dinner
parties. Modern man also reacts and behaves at these events in
much the same way as he did over a hundred thousand years
ago.
Now to our restaurant or dinner party: getting a decision in
your favour is easier when the other person is relaxed and his
defensive barriers have been lowered. To achieve this end, and
keeping in mind what has already been said about our ances-
tors, a few simple rules need to be followed.
First, whether you are dining at home or at a restaurant,
have the other person sitting with his back to a solid wall or
3 4 4

--- Page 339 ---

Seating Arrangements
 —
 Where to Sit, and Why
screen. Research shows that respiration, heart rate, brainwave
frequencies and blood pressure rapidly increase when a person
sits with his back to an open space, particularly where others
are moving about. Tension is further increased if the person's
back is towards an open door or a window at ground level. So
this a good position to seat someone when you want to
unnerve or rattle. Next, the lights should be dimmed and
muffled background music should be played to relax the
senses. Many top restaurants have an open fireplace or fire fac-
simile near the entrance of the restaurant to recreate the effects
of the fire that burned at the ancient cave feasts. It would be
best to use a round table and to have the other person's view
of other people obscured by a screen or large green plant if
you want a captive audience.
Top restaurants use these relaxation techniques to extract
large amounts of money from their customers' wallets for
ordinary food, and men have been using them for thousands of
years to create a romantic atmosphere for their women. It's far
easier to obtain a favourable decision under these circum-
stances than it will ever be in restaurants that have bright
lighting, tables and chairs placed in open areas and the
banging of plates, knives and forks.
Summary
Seating positions should not be accidental; placing certain
people in specific positions can affect the outcome of a
meeting. The next time you go to a meeting with anyone, ask
yourself: who is the person you want to influence most and
where is the best position to sit to achieve this? Who is likely
to want to argue or oppose? If there is no appointed leader,
who has claimed a seating position to give themselves the most
power? If you want to control, where should you sit? The
answers to these questions will not only give you a powerful
edge, they will prevent others from trying to dominate or
control the meeting.
3 4 5

--- Page 340 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_340_00.jpeg]

Chapter 18
INTERVIEWS, POWER
PLAYS AND
OFFICE POLITICS
Adam left the interview suspecting he'd done badly. Was
it what he'd said that blew it? Or perhaps his chocolate
brown suit, goatee beard, earring and overstuffed briefcase
turned them off? Or had he simply sat in the wrong chair?
Most job interviews are non-productive because studies show
a strong correlation between how much the interviewer likes
the interviewee and whether or not they get the job. In the end,
most of the factual information that comes from the curricu-
lum vitae — the real stuff about the candidate that is a good
indicator of performance - is forgotten. What is remembered
is the impression the candidate made on the interviewer.
First impressions are the 'love-at-first-sight'
of the business world.
346

--- Page 341 ---

Interviews, Power Plays and Office Politics
Professor Frank Bernieri of the University of Toledo analysed
the performances of job applicants of various ages and back-
grounds during 20-minute interviews in which the interviewers
were asked to rate each candidate on attributes such as ambi-
tion, intelligence and competence. Then a group of observers
was asked to watch video footage of just the first 15 seconds of
each interview. The results showed that the observers' first
impressions in 15 seconds almost paralleled the impressions of
the interviewers. This study gives us further convincing evi-
dence that you definitely don't get a second chance to make a
first impression and that your approach, handshake and overall
body language are the key factors in deciding the outcome.
Why James Bond Looked Cool, Calm
and Collected
Research in the field of linguistics has shown a direct relation-
ship between the amount of status, power or prestige a person
commands, and their vocabulary range. The higher up the
social or management ladder a person is, the better he is likely
to be able to communicate in words and phrases. Body lan-
guage research has revealed a correlation between a person's
command of the spoken word and the number of gestures they
use to communicate their message. The person at the top end
of the status scale can use his range of vocabulary to commu-
nicate his meaning, whereas the less educated, less skilled
lower-status person will rely more on gestures than words to
communicate his message. He doesn't have the words so he
substitutes gestures for words. As a general rule, the higher up
the person is on the socio-economic scale, the less gesticula-
tion and body movement they are likely to use.
Special Agent James Bond used these principles to great
effect by having minimal body gestures, especially when he
was under pressure. When he was being intimidated by the
baddies, being insulted or shot at, he remained relatively
motionless and spoke in short, monotone sentences.
3 4 7

--- Page 342 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
James Bond was so cool he could even make
love immediately after killing ten villains.
High status people always 'keep their cool', which means
revealing as little of their emotions as possible. Actors such as
Jim Carrey are the opposite — they often play highly animated
roles, emphasising a lack of power; and usually plays power-
less, intimidated men.
The Nine Golden Keys to Making Great First
Impressions
Let's assume you're going to an interview and you want to
make the best first impression. Keep in mind that others form
up to 90% of their opinion about you in the first four minutes
and that 60 to 80% of the impact you will make is non-verbal.
Here are nine Golden Keys to getting it right first time in an
interview:
1.
 In the Reception Area
Remove your outerwear and give it to the receptionist if possi-
ble. Avoid entering an office with your arms full of clutter that
can make you fumble and look inept. Always
 stand
 in a recep-
tion area — never sit. Receptionists will insist you 'take a seat'
because when you do, you're out of sight and they no longer
have to deal with you. Stand with Hand-in-Hand behind your
back (confidence) and slowly rock back and forth on your feet
(confident, controlled) or use the Steeple gesture. This body
language is a constant reminder that you are still there and
waiting. But never do this at the Tax Office.
2.The Entry
Your entry tells others how you expect to be treated. When the
receptionist has given you the green light to enter, walk in
without hesitation. Do not stand in the doorway like a
348

--- Page 343 ---

Interviews, Power Plays and Office Politics
naughty schoolchild waiting to see the headmaster. When you
walk through the door of the person's office, maintain the
same speed. People who lack confidence change gears and
perform a small shuffle as they enter.
3.The Approach
Even if the person is on the phone, rummaging through a
drawer or tying his shoelaces, walk in directly and confidently
with a smooth motion. Put down your briefcase, folder or what-
ever is in your hands, shake the person's hand and immediately
take a seat. Let the other person see that you are accustomed to
walking confidently into offices and that you don't expect to be
kept waiting. People who walk slowly or take long strides
convey that they have plenty of time on their hands, are not
interested in what they are doing or have nothing else to do.
This is fine for retired millionaires and those who live in Florida
and Queensland, but not for anyone who wants to convey
power, authority or capability or that they are a healthy, poten-
tial mate. Influential people and those who command attention
walk briskly at a medium pace with medium length strides.
4.The Handshake
Keep your palm straight and return the pressure you receive.
Let the other person decide when to end the handshake. Step
to the left of a rectangular desk as you approach to avoid being
given a Palm-Down handshake. Never shake directly across a
desk. Use a person's name twice in the first 15 seconds and
never talk for more than 30 seconds at a time.
5. When You Sit
If you are compelled to sit in a low chair directly facing the
other person, turn it away 45 degrees from the person to avoid
being stuck in the 'reprimand' position. If you can't angle the
chair, angle your body instead.
6. Seating Areas
If you're invited to sit in an informal area of the person's
349

--- Page 344 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
office, such as at an informal coffee table, this is a positive sign
because 95% of business rejections are delivered from behind
a desk. Never sit on a low sofa that sinks so low it makes you
look like a giant pair of legs topped by a small head - if nec-
essary, sit upright on the edge so you can control your body
language and gestures, and angle your body to 45 degrees away
from the person.
7.Your Gestures
People who are cool, calm, collected and in control of their
emotions use clear, uncomplicated, deliberate movements.
High-status individuals use fewer gestures than low-status
individuals. This is an ancient negotiating ploy — people with
power don't have to move much. Keep in mind that Eastern
Europeans gesture more from the elbow down than Western-
ers, and Southern Europeans gesture more with their entire
arms and shoulders. Mirror the other person's gestures and
expressions when appropriate.
8. Distance
Respect the other person's Personal Space, which will be
largest in the opening minutes of the meeting. If you move too
close, the person will respond by sitting back, leaning away or
using repetitive gestures such as drumming the fingers. As a
rule, you can move closer to familiar people but further back
from new ones. Men generally move closer to women they
work with while women generally move further back when
they work with men. Work closer to those of similar age and
further back from significantly older or younger ones.
9.Your Exit
Pack your things calmly and deliberately - not in a frenzy -
shake hands if possible, turn and walk out. If the door was
closed when you entered, close it behind you as you leave.
People always watch you from behind as you leave so, if you're
a man, make sure you have shined the back of your shoes. This
is an area many men neglect and women are critical of this.
3 5 0

--- Page 345 ---

Interviews, Power Plays and Office Politics
When a woman decides to leave she will point her foot towards
the door and begin to adjust the back of her clothing and hair
so that she makes a good rear-view impression as she departs.
As mentioned earlier, hidden cameras show that, if you're a
woman, others study your rear as you depart — whether you
like it or not. When you get to the door turn around slowly
and smile. It's far better that they recall your smiling face than
your rear end.
When Someone Keeps You Waiting
If someone keeps you waiting for more than 20 minutes it
shows either they're disorganised or it could be a form of
power play. Keeping someone waiting is an effective way of
reducing their status and enhancing the status of the person
who is making them wait. This same effect can be seen when
people are waiting in line at a restaurant or cinema - everyone
assumes that the wait is going to be worthwhile, otherwise
why would we all be waiting?
Always take a book, PDA, laptop or office work, which
shows that you too are busy and are not prepared to be incon-
venienced. When the person who has kept you waiting comes
out to meet you let them speak first, lift your head slowly from
your work and greet them, then pack up smoothly and confi-
dently. Another good strategy when made to wait is to take out
some financial papers and a calculator and do calculations.
When they call for you say, 'I'll be ready in a moment - I'll just
finish these calculations.' Or you could make all your mobile
phone calls. The clear message you are sending is that you're a
very busy person and are not being inconvenienced by their
disorganisation. And if you suspect the other person is playing
a power game, arrange for an urgent call to be put through to
you during your meeting. Take the call, loudly mention large
amounts of money, drop in a well-known name or two, tell the
caller you never settle for second best and that they are to
report back to you as soon as possible. Hang up the phone,
351

--- Page 346 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
apologise for the interruption and continue as if nothing had
happened. Hey, it works for James Bond...it'll work for you.
If the other person takes a phone call during the meeting or
a third person enters and begins what seems like a long con-
versation, take out your book or homework and begin to read.
This gives them privacy and demonstrates that you don't waste
your time. If you feel the person is doing these things inten-
tionally, take out your own mobile phone and make several
important follow-up calls about the important ventures you
were discussing earlier.
Fake It Till You Make It?
If you avoid Hand-to-Face gestures and always talk using open-
ness signals, does this mean you can tell some real whoppers
and get away with it? Well...not necessarily, because if you use
open positions when you
 know
 you're lying, your palms are
likely to sweat, your cheeks may twitch and your pupils con-
strict. The most competent liars are those who can go into their
acting role and act as if they actually believe the lie. A profes-
sional actor who can do this better than anyone else is
presented with an Oscar. While we are not suggesting you tell
lies, there is powerful evidence that if you practise the positive
skills we've mentioned throughout this book, they will become
second nature to you and serve you well for the rest of your life.
Scientists proved the 'fake it till you make it' concept using
tests on birds. In many bird species, the more dominant a bird
is, the darker its plumage will be. Darker coloured birds are
first in line for food and mates. Researchers took a number of
lighter, weaker birds and dyed their plumage dark so that these
birds would be 'lying' to the other birds that they were domi-
nant. But the result was that the 'liar' birds were attacked by
the
 real
 dominant birds because the 'liars' were still displaying
weak and submissive body language. In the next tests the
weaker birds, both male and female, were not only dyed but
also injected with testosterone hormones to make them act
3 5 2

--- Page 347 ---

Interviews, Tower Plays and Office Politics
dominantly. This time the 'liars' succeeded as they began strut-
ting around acting in confident, superior ways, which
completely fooled the real dominant birds. This demonstrates
that you need to cast yourself into a believable role in an inter-
view and mentally practise in advance how you will behave if
you want others to take you seriously.
Seven Simple Strategies for Giving You the
Extra Edge
1. Stand up for Meetings
Conduct all short-term decision-making meetings standing
up. Studies show that standing conversations are significantly
shorter than sitting ones and the person who conducts a stand-
ing meeting is perceived as having higher status than those
who sit. Standing whenever others enter your workspace is
also an excellent timesaver, so consider having no visitors'
chairs in your own work area. Standing decisions are quick
and to the point and others don't waste your time with social
chatter or questions such as 'How's the family?'
2. Sit Competitors with Their Backs to the Door
As discussed, studies reveal that when our backs are towards an
open space we become stressed, blood pressure increases, our
heart beats faster, our brainwave output increases and we breathe
more quickly as our body readies itself for a possible rear attack.
This is an excellent position in which to place your opponents.
3. Keep Your Fingers Together
People who keep their fingers closed when they talk with their
hands and keep their hands below chin level, command the
most attention. Using open fingers or having your hands held
above the chin is perceived as less powerful.
4. Keep Your Elbows Out
When you sit on a chair, keep your elbows out or on the arms
3 5 3

--- Page 348 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
of the chair. Submissive, timid individuals keep their elbows in
to protect themselves and are perceived as fearful.
5. Use Power Words
A study at the University of California showed that the most
persuasive words in spoken language are:
 discovery, guaran-
tee, love, proven, results, save, easy, health, money, new,
safety
 and
 you.
 Practise using these words. The new results
you'll get from the discovery of these proven words will guar-
antee you more love, better health and will save you money.
And they're completely safe, and easy to use.
6. Carry a Slim Briefcase
A slim briefcase with a combination lock is carried by an
important person who is concerned only with the bottom-line
details; large, bulky briefcases are carried by those who do all
the work and are perceived as not being sufficiently organised
to get things done on time.
7. Watch Their Coat Buttons
Analysis of videotaped confrontations, for example, between
unions and corporations, show a higher frequency of agree-
ment is reached when people have their coats unbuttoned.
People who cross their arms on their chest often do it with
their jacket buttoned and are more negative. When a person
suddenly unbuttons their jacket in a meeting, you can reason-
ably assume that they have also just opened their mind.
Summary
Before you go to an important interview or meeting, sit quietly
for five minutes and mentally practise seeing yourself doing
these things and doing them well. When your mind sees them
clearly, your body will be able to carry them out and others
will react accordingly.
3 5 4

--- Page 349 ---

Interviews, Power Plays and Office Politics
Office Power Politics
Have you ever been for a job interview and felt overwhelmed
or helpless when you sat in the visitor's chair? Where the inter-
viewer seemed so big and overwhelming and you felt small and
insignificant? It is likely that the interviewer had cunningly
arranged his office furnishings to raise his own status and
power and, in so doing, lower yours. Certain strategies using
chairs and seating arrangements can create this atmosphere in
an office.
There are three factors in raising perceived status and power
using chairs: the size of the chair and its accessories, the height
of the chair from the floor and the location of the chair rela-
tive to the other person.
1. Chair Size and Accessories
The height of the back of the chair raises or lowers a person's
status. The higher the back of the chair, the more power and
status the person sitting in it is perceived to have. Kings,
queens, popes and other high-status people may have the back
of their throne or official chair as high as 8 feet or more (2.5m)
to show their status relative to everyone else; the senior execu-
tive has a high-backed leather chair and his visitor's chair has
a low back. How much power would the Queen or the Pope
have if they were always sitting on a small piano stool?
Swivel chairs have more power and status than fixed chairs,
allowing the user freedom of movement when he is placed
under pressure. Fixed chairs allow little or no movement and
this lack of movement is compensated for by the sitter's use of
body gestures that reveal their attitudes and feelings. Chairs
with armrests, those that lean back and those that have wheels
have more power.
2. Chair Height
The acquisition of power using height was covered in Chapter
16 but it is worth noting that status is gained if your chair is
adjusted higher off the floor than the other person's. Some
3 5 5

--- Page 350 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_350_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
advertising executives are known for sitting on high-backed
chairs that are adjusted for maximum height while their visi-
tors sit opposite, in the defensive position, on a sofa or chair
that is so low that their eyes are level with the executive's desk.
3. Chair Location
As mentioned in the chapter on seating arrangements, most
power is exerted on a visitor when his chair is placed directly
opposite in the Competitive Position. A common power play is
to place the visitor's chair as far away as possible from the
executive's desk into the social or public territory zone, which
further reduces the visitor's status.
How to Switch Table Territories
When two people sit directly opposite each other across a
table, they unconsciously divide it into two equal territories.
Each claims half as his own territory and will reject the other
encroaching upon it.
There will be occasions, however, when it may be difficult or
inappropriate to take the corner position to present your case.
Let's assume that you have a folder, book, quotation or sample
to present to another person who is sitting behind a rectangu-
lar desk and your objective is to get into the best position for
presenting. First, place the article on the table and he'll either
lean forward and look at it, take it over to his side, or push it
back into your territory.
Paper placed on
territorial line
356

--- Page 351 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_351_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_351_01.jpeg]

Interviews, Power Plays and Office Politics
If he leans forward to look at it but doesn't pick it up,
you're compelled to deliver your presentation from where
you sit because he doesn't want you on his side of the desk.
If this happens, angle your body away at 45 degrees to
present your case. If he takes it onto his side, however, this
gives you the opportunity to ask permission to enter his
territory and take either the Corner or Co-operative
Position.
Taking paper into
his territory signals
non-verbal acceptance
Non-verbal agreement
to enter his space
If, however, he pushes it back towards you, stay on your side.
Never encroach on the other person's territory unless you have
been given verbal or non-verbal permission to do so or you
will put them offside.
Seated Body Pointing
Take the following situation: you're a supervisor and are about
to counsel a subordinate whose work performance is not up to
scratch. You feel that you will need to use direct questions that
require direct answers and this may put the subordinate under
pressure. At times you will also need to show the subordinate
357

--- Page 352 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_352_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_352_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
compassion and, from time to time, that you agree with his
thoughts or actions.
Leaving aside interview and questioning techniques for
these illustrations, consider the following points: (1) The
counselling session will be in your office; (2) The subordinate
will be seated on a chair with fixed legs and no arms, one
that causes him to use body gestures and postures that
will give you an understanding of his attitudes; and (3)
You'll be sitting on a swivel chair that has arms, letting you
eliminate some of your own gestures and allowing you to move
around.
There are three main angle positions you can use. As with
the standing triangular position, sitting at 45 degrees gives an
informal, relaxed attitude to the meeting and is a good
opening position for a counselling session.
Opening a session using a 45 degree angle
keeps things relaxed
You can show non-verbal agreement with the subordinate
from this position by mirroring his movements and gestures.
As in the open standing position, their bodies point to a third
point to form a triangle, which can show agreement.
By turning your chair to point your body directly at
someone you non-verbally tell them that you want direct
answers to your direct questions.
358

--- Page 353 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_353_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_353_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_353_02.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_353_03.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_353_04.jpeg]

Interviews, Power Plays and Office Politics
Direct body pointing keeps things serious
When you position your body 45 degrees away from the other
person, you take the pressure off the interview. This is an
excellent position from which to ask delicate or embarrassing
questions, encouraging more open answers to your questions
without them feeling as if they are being pressured.
The right 45 degrees away position
How to Re-arrange an Office
Having read this far in the book, you should now be able to
work out how to arrange an office to have as much power,
influence or control as you want or to make it as relaxed,
friendly and informal as you want. Here now is a case study
showing how we rearranged someone's office to help solve
some of his personal manager/employee relationship prob-
lems.
359

--- Page 354 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
John worked for a large finance company. He had been pro-
moted to a manager's position and given an office. After a few
months in the role, John found that the other employees dis-
liked dealing with him and his relationship with them was
often tense, particularly when they were in his office. He found
it difficult to get them to follow his instructions and had heard
they were talking about him behind his back. Our observa-
tions of John's dilemma revealed that the communication
breakdowns were at their worst when the employees were in
his office.
For the purposes of this exercise, we'll ignore any of John's
management skills and concentrate on the non-verbal aspects
of the problem. Here's a summary of our observations and
conclusions about John's office set-up:
1. The visitor's chair was placed in the competitive position
in relation to John.
2. The walls of the office were solid panels except for an
outside window and a clear glass partition where John
could look into the general office area and be seen by the
rest of the staff. His visibility reduced John's status and
could increase the power of any subordinate who was
sitting in the visitor's chair because the other employees
were located directly behind the visitor and were, in
effect, on the subordinate's side of the table
3. John's desk had a solid front that hid his lower body and
prevented the subordinates observing his lower gestures
to evaluate how he felt.
4. The visitor's chair was placed so that the visitor's back
was to the open door.
5. John often sat using the Catapult or Leg-Over-Arm-of-
Chair gestures or both whenever a subordinate was in his
office.
6. John had a swivel chair with a high back, armrests and
wheels. The visitor's chair was a plain low-backed chair
with fixed legs and no armrests.
360

--- Page 355 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_355_00.jpeg]

Interviews, Power Plays and Office Politics
John's initial office layout
From a user-friendly, non-verbal standpoint, his office was a
disaster area. It felt unfriendly to anyone who entered. The fol-
lowing rearrangements were made to help encourage John's
management style to become more friendly:
1. John's desk was placed in front of the glass partition,
making his office appear bigger and allowing him to be
visible to those who entered. In this way, visitors were
greeted by John personally, not by his desk.
2. The 'hot seat' was placed in the Corner Position, making
communication more open and allowing the corner to act
as a partial barrier for staff who felt insecure.
3. The glass partition was coated with a mirror finish, allow-
ing John to see out, but not permitting others to see in.
This raised John's status by securing his territory and cre-
ating a more intimate atmosphere inside his office.
361

--- Page 356 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_356_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
hot seat
Revised office layout
4. A low round table with three identical swivel chairs were
placed at the other end of the office so informal meetings
could take place.
5. In the original layout, John's desk could give half the
desktop space to the visitor but the revised layout gave
John back the entire desktop.
6. John practised sitting in open positions, used subtle
Steeple gestures and consciously used his palms whenever
he spoke with others.
The results? Significantly improved manager/staff relation-
ships and some staff began describing John as 'easygoing' and
as a relaxed person to work with.
All that is needed to raise your status, and increase your
power and effectiveness with others, is a little thought given to
non-verbal gymnastics in your office or home. Unfortunately,
most executive offices are arranged as John's was initially set
out, because offices are designed by office designers, not by
those who understand interaction between people. Rarely is
consideration given to the negative non-verbal signals that can
362

--- Page 357 ---

Interviews, Power Plays and Office Politics
be unwittingly communicated to others.
Study your own workplace layout and use the preceding
information to make the positive changes needed.
Summary
The thing about power plays and office politics is that you can
anticipate them and even plan your own in advance. Adam
never knew that, in Western cultures, men wearing chocolate
coloured suits turn women off, or that a goatee beard, while it
may be a fashion statement, subconsciously repels older
people because of its association with Satan. And the earring
and the overstuffed brief case... well, these items are taken to
interviews by the non-verbally uninformed.
363

--- Page 358 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_358_00.jpeg]

CHAPTER 19
PUTTING IT ALL
TOGETHER
When you look quickly at this image, you'll see an elephant.
It's only when you examine it closely that you see that things
are not what they appear to be. When most people look at
others they see the person, but they miss revealing details that
are obvious when pointed out. And so it is with body lan-
guage. Communication through body language has been
going on for over a million years but has only been scientifi-
cally studied to any extent since the end of the twentieth
century. Body language is finally being 'discovered' by people
throughout the world and is now a part of formal education
and business training everywhere.
This final chapter is devoted to social and business scenar-
ios and will give you the opportunity to see how well you can
now read body signals. Before you read the notes, however,
study each picture sequence and see how many body language
signals you can see from what you've read in this book. Score
one point for every major signal you can spot and you will
receive an overall rating assessment at the end. You will be
amazed to find how much your 'perceptiveness' has improved.
Keep in mind that while we are analysing frozen gestures here,
3 6 4

--- Page 359 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_359_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_359_01.jpeg]

Putting It All Together
it all needs to be read in clusters of gestures, in context, and
with allowance for cultural differences.
How Well Can You Read Between the Lines?
1. What Are the Three Main Signals in this illustration?
Answers
This is a good example of an open-
ness cluster. The palms are fully
exposed in the submissive position
and the fingers are spread to give
more impact to the gesture and to
signal 
non-aggressiveness. 
His
entire body is open showing that
nothing is being concealed. This
man is communicating an open,
non-threatening attitude.
2. What Are the Five Main Signals?
Answers.
This is a classic deceit cluster. As he
rubs his eye he looks away and both
eyebrows are raised to the disbelief
position. His head is turned away and
slightly down, showing a negative atti-
tude. He also has an insincere,
tight-lipped smile.
3. What Are the Three Main Signals?
Answers
365

--- Page 360 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_360_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_360_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_360_02.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
The incongruency of gestures is obvious here.
The man is pretending to smile confidently as
he crosses the room but one hand has crossed
his body to adjust his watch and form a
partial arm barrier. His smile is a basic fear-
face. This shows that he is unsure of himself
or his circumstances.
4. What Are the Five Main Signals?
Answers
This woman disapproves of the person at
whom she's looking. She has turned neither
her head nor body towards him but is giving
him a sideways glance with her head slightly
down (disapproval), eyebrows slightly turned
down (anger), a full arm-cross gesture (defen-
sive) and the corners of her mouth are turned
down.
5. What Are the Four Main Signals?
Answers
366

--- Page 361 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_361_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_361_01.jpeg]

Putting It All Together
Dominance, superiority and territoriality are evident here. The
Catapult shows a superior 'know-it-all' attitude and feet-on-
desk shows a territorial claim to it. To further highlight his ego
he has a high-status chair with wheels, arms and other acces-
sories. He is also sitting in the defensive/competitive position.
6. What Are the Three Main Signals?
Answers
The hands-on-hips gesture is used by the
child to make himself appear larger and
more threatening. The chin is jutting
forward to show defiance and the mouth is
opened wide to expose the teeth, just as
animals do before they attack.
7. What Are the Five Main Signals?
Answers
This cluster can be summed up in one word
— negative. The folder is used as a barrier
and the arms and legs are folded due to
nervousness or defensiveness. His coat is
buttoned and his sunglasses hide any eye or
pupil signals. Considering that people form
90 per cent of their opinion of someone in
the first four minutes, it's unlikely that this
man will ever get to first base with another
person.
8. What Are the Six Main Signals?
Answers
367

--- Page 362 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_362_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_362_01.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_362_02.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Both 
men 
are 
using
aggression and readiness
gestures, the man on the
left using the Hands-on-
Hips gesture and the man
on the right, the Thumbs-
in-Belt. The man on the
left is less aggressive than
the man on the right as he
is leaning backwards and
his body is pointing slightly away from the man on the right.
The man on the right, however, has assumed an intimidating
pose by pointing his body directly at the other man and taking
an erect stance. His facial expression is also consistent with his
body gestures and his mouth is turned down.
9. What Are the Thirteen Main Signals?
Answers
The man on the left is straddling his chair in an attempt to
take control of the discussion or to dominate the man on the
right. He is also pointing his body directly at the man on the
right. He has clenched fingers and his feet are locked together
under his chair, showing a frustrated attitude, which means
that he's probably having difficulty getting his point across.
368

--- Page 363 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_363_00.jpeg]

Putting It All Together
The man in the centre feels superior to the other two because
of the Catapult gesture he is using. He also has the Figure 4 leg
position, indicating that he could be competitive or argumen-
tative. He has a high-status chair that swivels, leans back and
has wheels and armrests. The man on the right is seated on a
low-status chair that has fixed legs and no accessories. His
arms and legs are tightly crossed (defensive) and his head is
down (hostile), body pointing away (disinterest), indicating
that he doesn't like what he hears.
10. What Are the Fourteen Main Signals?
Answers
The woman is displaying classic courtship gestures. She has
one foot forward, pointing towards the man on the far left
(interest), a combination of Hand-on-Hip and Thumb-in-Belt
(assertive, readiness), her left wrist is being flashed (sensual)
and she is blowing cigarette smoke upwards (confident, posi-
tive) . She is also giving a sideways glance to the man on the far
left and he is responding to her courtship gestures by adjusting
his tie (preening) and pointing his foot at her. His head is up
3 6 9

--- Page 364 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_364_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
(interested). The man in the centre is clearly unimpressed with
the other man as he has his body pointing away and is giving
him an aggressive sideways glance. He has his palms out of
sight and is blowing his cigarette smoke down (negative). He is
also leaning against the wall (territorial aggression).
11. What Are the Twelve Main Signals?
Answers
The man on the left is using superiority gestures and has an
arrogant attitude towards the man sitting opposite. He is using
eye block signals to block the other man from sight and his head
is tilted back to 'look down his nose' at him. Defensiveness is
also evident because his knees are held tightly together and he
is holding his wine glass with both hands to form a barrier. The
man in the middle has been excluded from the conversation by
the two other men not forming a triangle to include him. He
does, however, seem aloof, as shown by his Thumbs-in-Waist-
coat gesture (superiority), leaning back on his chair and is using
a Crotch Display (macho). The man on the right has heard
enough and has taken the starter's position (ready to leave) and
his foot and body are pointed towards the nearest exit. His eye-
brows and the corners of his mouth are turned down, and his
head is slightly down, revealing disapproval.
370

--- Page 365 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_365_00.jpeg]

Putting It All Together
12. What Are the Eleven Main Signals?
Answers
The man on the left and the man on the right have taken closed
body positions. The central man's attitude shows superiority
and sarcasm and he is using the Lapel-Grasping gesture with a
thumb-up (superiority) plus a thumb-point gesture towards
the man on his left (ridicule). The man on the right has
responded defensively with crossed legs, and aggressively with
the Upper-Arm Grip gesture (self-control) and sideways
glance. The man on the left of this sequence is also unim-
pressed with the central man's attitude. He has crossed legs
(defensive), Palm-in-Pocket (unwilling to participate) and is
looking at the floor while using the Pain-in-Neck gesture.
13. What Are the Twelve Main Signals?
Answers
This sequence also shows a tense atmosphere. All three
men are sitting back in their chairs to keep the maximum
distance from each other. The man on the right is probably
causing the problem because of his negative gesture cluster. As
37

--- Page 366 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_366_00.jpeg]


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_366_01.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
he is speaking he is using the nose touch gesture (deceit) and his
right arm has crossed his body to make a partial arm barrier
(defensive). His lack of concern about the other men's opinions
is shown by the Leg-over-Chair gesture, Crotch Display and his
body is pointed away from them. The man on the left disap-
proves of what the man on the right has to say and is using the
Lint-Picking gesture (disapproval), his legs are crossed (defen-
sive) and pointed away (uninterested). The man in the middle
would like to say something but is holding back his opinion,
shown by his self-restraint gesture of gripping the arms of the
chair and his locked ankles. He has also issued a non-verbal
challenge to the man on the right by pointing his body at him.
14. What Are the Eight Main Signals?
Answers
372

--- Page 367 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_367_00.jpeg]

Putting It All Together
In this scene the man on the left and the woman have mirrored
each other's gestures to form 'bookends' on the couch. The
couple are very interested in each other and have positioned
their hands in such a way that they can expose their wrists,
and they have crossed their legs towards one another. The man
in the middle has a Tight-Lipped Smile in an attempt to look
interested in what the other man has to say but this is incon-
gruent with his other facial and body gestures. His head is
down (disapproval), the corner of his mouth turned down,
his eyebrows are also down (anger) and he is giving the
other man a sideways glance. His arms and legs are tightly
crossed (defensive) — all indicating that he has a very negative
attitude.
15. What Are the Fifteen Main Signals?
Answers
The man on the left is using a cluster to convey openness and
honesty - exposed palms, foot forward, head up, coat unbut-
toned, arms and legs apart, leaning forward and smiling
gestures. Unfortunately for him, however, his story is not
getting across. The woman is sitting back in her chair with her
legs crossed away (defensive), she has a partial arm-barrier
(defensive), a clenched fist (tension), her head down and is
using a critical evaluation gesture (hand to face). The man in
the middle has a raised Steeple gesture, indicating that he feels
3 7 3

--- Page 368 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_368_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
confident or smug and he is sitting in the Figure 4 leg position,
showing that his attitude is competitive or argumentative. We
can assume that his overall attitude is negative as he is sitting
back, his head down.
l6.aWhat Are the Nine Main Signals?
The following three scenes demonstrate typical defence,
aggression and courtship clusters.
Answers
The beginning of the conversation
In the first scene, all three people have their arms folded, two
have their legs crossed (defensive) and all have their bodies ori-
ented away from each other, all indicating that they may have
just met for the first time. The man on the right appears inter-
ested in the woman as he has his right foot twisted around to
point at her and he is giving her a sideways glance, combined
with raised eyebrows (interest) and a smile; he is leaning
towards her with the upper part of his body. She is closed off
to both men at this point.
374

--- Page 369 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_369_00.jpeg]

Putting It All Together
16b. What Are the Eleven Main Signals?
Answers
Five minutes later
The woman has now uncrossed her legs and is standing in the
Attention position, while the man on the left has uncrossed his
legs and is pointing one foot at her (interest) and leaning
towards her. He is using the Thumbs-in-Belt gesture, which is
either intended as a competitive display towards the other
man, in which case the attitude is aggression, or is directed
towards the woman, making it a sexual display. He is also
standing straighter to make himself appear bigger. The man
on the right seems intimidated by the other man, as seen by his
now more erect stance, his crossed arms and the fact that he is
giving the other man a sideways glance combined with eye-
brows down (disapproval) and his smile has gone.
16c. What Are the Fifteen Main Signals?
Answers
375

--- Page 370 ---


[IMAGE_REF: img_page_370_00.jpeg]

The Definitive Book of Body Language
Fifteen minutes later
The attitudes and emotions of these people are now clearly
shown by their body language. The man on the left has kept
his Thumbs-in-Belt, Foot-Forward position and has turned his
body more towards the woman, making it a complete
courtship display. His thumbs are also gripping his belt much
tighter to make the gesture more noticeable and his body has
become even more erect. The woman is responding to this
courtship display with her own, showing that she is interested
in being involved with him. She has uncrossed her arms,
turned her body towards him and is pointing one foot at him.
Her courtship gestures include hair touching, exposed wrists,
chest forward to show cleavage and positive facial expression,
and she is blowing her cigarette smoke upwards (confidence).
The man on the right is unhappy about being excluded and is
using the Hands-on-Hips gesture (aggressive readiness) and
standing Crotch Display to show his displeasure.
In summary, the man on the left has won the woman's
attentions and the other man should take a hike in the
Himalayas.
376

--- Page 371 ---

Putting It All Together
How Did You Rate?
130- 150 points
Holy intuition Batman! You are an extremely effective com-
municator who is sensitive to other people's feelings most of
the time. Go to the top of the class!
100 - 130 points
You are very good with people and generally have a 'feel'
about what's going on. With perseverance and practice you can
become a top-notch communicator.
70 - 100 points
Sometimes you twig to how people are feeling about things or
about each other, at other times you find out several days later.
You need diligent body language practice.
70 or fewer
You've read this book and still not even scored 70? We suggest
you search for a career in computing, accounting or as a
medical receptionist where people skills are not a requirement.
Go back to the start of this book and read it again. Mean-
while, do not leave home or even answer a telephone.
Summary
Research has now shown convincingly that if you change your
body language, you can change many things about your
approach to life. You can alter your mood before going out,
feel more confident at work, become more likeable and be
more persuasive or convincing. When you change your body
language you interact differently with people around you and
they, in turn, will respond differently to you.
When you first start increasing your awareness of body lan-
guage you'll probably feel uncomfortable and self-conscious.
You will be aware of practically every expression you make,
377

--- Page 372 ---

The Definitive Book of Body Language
surprised at how many gestures you make and how often you
fiddle with things and you'll feel as if everyone around is
seeing it all too. Remember that most people are completely
unaware of what their bodies are doing and they're so busy
trying to make an impression on you that they are not con-
sciously noticing what you are doing. It may seem strange at
first to consciously have your palms open and keep steady eye
contact if you've spent your life keeping your hands in your
pockets or holding hands with yourself and looking away.
You may ask, 'How do I watch someone's body language
while thinking about my own body language and trying to con-
centrate on what we're talking about?' Remember that your
brain is already programmed to read many body language
signals so all you are doing is learning consciously to read the
signals and messages. It's like riding a bicycle for the first time
— it feels a little scary at the start and you might take an occa-
sional tumble but before long you'll be riding like a pro.
Some people may feel that learning body language skills is
manipulative or insincere, but learning to be proficient at
reading it and using it is no different to wearing certain types
of clothes, using certain language or telling stories that put
you in the best light. The difference here is that it won't
happen unconsciously and you'll make a better impression on
others. If you're a man, remember that women are reading and
decoding your body language whether you realise it or not, so
learning how it's done can give you an equal footing. Without
effective body language you can be like a spaghetti Western —
the lips don't match the words and the viewers are constantly
confused or switch channels.
Finally, here is a summary of the keys points for making a
positive body language impression on others.
The Six Secrets of Attractive Body Language
Face: Have an animated face and make smiling a part of your
regular repertoire. Make sure you flash your teeth.
378

--- Page 373 ---

Putting It All Together
Gestures:
 Be expressive but don't overdo it. Keep your fingers
closed when you gesture, your hands below chin level and
avoid arm or feet crossing.
Head Movement: Use Triple Nods when talking and Head
Tilt when listening. Keep your chin up.
Eye
 Contact:
 Give the amount of eye contact that makes
everyone feel comfortable. Unless looking at others is a cul-
tural no-no, lookers gain more credibility than non-lookers.
Posture:
 Lean forward when listening, stand straight when
speaking.
Territory:
 Stand as close as you feel comfortable. If the other
person moves back, don't step forward again.
Mirror:
 Subtly mirror the body language of others.
379